Brihat Parashara Hora Shastra

Chapter 1
The Creation

I prostrate before the lotus-feet of Lord Vighneswara, offspring of Uma, the cause of destruction of sorrow, who served by Mahabhutas (the five great elements of the universe) etc; who has the face of a tusker and who consumes the essence of Kapittha and Jambu fruits.

1-4. Offering his obeisance to all-knowing Maharishi Parashar and with folded hands, Maitreya said:

"O Venerable Maharishi, Jyotish, the supreme limb of the Vedas, has three divisions, viz. Hora, Ganita, and Samhita. Among the said three divisions, Hora or the general part of Jyotish is still more excellent. I desire to know of its glorious aspects from you. Be pleased to tell me, how this Universe is created? How does it end? What is the relationship of the animals born on this earth with the heavenly bodies? Please speak elaborately".

5-8. Maharishi Parashar answered, 'O Brahmin, your query (so to say the desire to know of the intricacies of Jyotish) has an auspicious purpose in it for the welfare of the Universe. Praying Lord Brahma and Shri Saraswati, His power (and consort), and Surya the leader of the grahas, and the cause of Creation, I shall proceed to narrate to you the science of Jyotish as heard through Lord Brahma. Only good will follow the teaching of this Vedic Science to the students who are peacefully disposed, who honour the preceptors (and elders) who speak only truth and are God fearing. Woeful forever, doubtlessly, will it be to impart knowledge of this science to an unwilling student, to a heterodox, and to a crafty person.

9-12. Shri Vishnu who is the lord (of all matters), who has undefiled spirit, who is endowed with the three gunas, although he transcends the grip of gunas (i.e. Gunatita), who is the Author of this Universe, who is glorious, who is the Cause and who is endowed with valour has no beginning. He authored the Universe and administers it with a quarter of his power. The other three quarters of Him, filled with nectar, are knowable only to the philosophers (of maturity). The Principal Evolver who is both perceptible and imperceptible in Vasudeva. The Imperceptible part of the Lord is endowed with dual powers, while the Perceptible with triple powers.

13-15. The three powers are: Shri Shakti (Mother Lakshmi) with Sattva-gun, Bhoo Shakti (Mother-Earth) with Rajo-gun, and Neel Shakti with Tamo-gun. Apart from the three, the fourth kind of Vishnu, influenced by Shri Shakti and Bhoo Shakti, assumes the form of Shankarshan with Tamo-gun, of Pradyumna with Rajo-gun, and of Anirudh with Sattva-gun.

16-17. Mahattatwa, Ahamkar, and Ahamkar Murti, and Brahma, are born from Shankarshan, Pradyumna, and Anirudh respectively. All these three forms are endowed with all the three gunas, with predominance of the Gun due to their origin.

18-19. Ahamkar is of three classes, i.e. with Sattvic, Rajasic, and Tamasic dispositions. Divine class, sensory organs and the five primordial compounds (space, air, fire, water, and earth) are respectively from the said three Ahamkaras.

20. Lord Vishnu,coupled with Shri Shakti rules over the three worlds. Coupled with Bhoo Shakti, He is Brahma causing the Universe. Coupled with Neel Shakti, He is Shiva, destroying the Universe.

21-24. The Lord is in all beings and the entire Universe is in Him. All beings contain both Jivatma and Paramatmamshas. Some have predominance of the former, while yet some have the latter in predominance. Paramatmamsh is predominant in the grahas, viz. Surya, etc., and Brahma, Shiva and others. Their powers or consorts too have predominance of Paramatmamsh. Others have more of Jivatmamsh.


Chapter 2
Great Incarnations (Of The Lord)

1.  Maitreya: "O Maharishi Parashar, are the incarnations of Vishnu, viz. Shri Ram, Shri Krishn, etc., endowed with Jivamsh?

2. Maharishi Parashar: "O Brahmin, the four incarnations, viz. Ram, Krishn, Narasimh, and Varah are wholly with Paramatmamsh. The other incarnations (than these, out of the ten) have in them Jivamsh too.

3-4. The Unborn lord has many incarnations. He has incarnated as the 9 grahas (Nava Grahas) to bestow on the living beings the results due to their Karmas. He is Janardan. He assumed the auspicious form of grahas to destroy the demons (evil forces) and sustain the divine beings.

5-7. From Surya the incarnation of Ram, from Chandr that of Krishn, from Mangal that of Narasimh, from Buddh that of Buddha, from Guru that of Vaman, from Shukr that of Parashuram, from Shani that of Kurma (Tortoise), from Rahu that of Varah (pig), and from Ketu that of Meen (Fish) occurred. All other incarnations than these also are through the grahas. The beings with more Paramatmamsh are called divine beings.

8-13. The beings with more Jivatmamsh are (mortal) beings. The high degree of Paramatmamsh from the grahas, viz. Surya, etc., did incarnate as Ram, Krishn, etc.. After completing the mission, the Paramatmamshas (of the respective) grahas again merge (in the  respective) grahas. The Jivatma portions from the grahas take births as human beings and live their lives  according to their Karmas and again merge in the grahas. And at the time of Great Destruction, the grahas as well merge in Lord Vishnu. One who knows of all these, will become versed in the knowledge of the past, present, and future. Without a knowledge of Jyotish these cannot be known. Hence, everyone should have a knowledge of Jyotish particularly the Brahmin. One who, devoid of knowledge of Jyotish, blames this Vedic Science will go to the hell called 'Raurava', and will be reborn blind.


Chapter 3
Grah Characters and Description

1. Maitreya: "O Maharishi, you have affectionately explained about the incarnations of grahas. Now kindly detail their characters and dispositions. 

2-3. Parashar: "O Brahmin, listen to the account of placement of the heavenly bodies. Out of the many luminous bodies sighted in the skies, some are stars; yet some are grahas. Those that have no movements are the Nakshatras (or asterisms).


4-6. Those are called 'Grahas' that move through the Nakshatras (or stellar mansions) in the zodiac. The said zodiac comprises of 27 Nakshatras commencing from Ashvini. The same area is divided in 12 parts equal to 12 'Rashis' commencing from Mesh. The names of the grahas commence from Surya. The rashi rising is known as 'Lagn'. Based on Lagn and the grahas joining and departing from each other, the native's good and bad effects are deducted.

[addition from Santhanam till sloka 7]
The names of the 27 Nakshatras are:

1. Ashvini		15. Swati
2. Bharani		16. Vishaka
3. Krittika		17. Anuradha
4. Rohini		18. Jyeshtha
5. Mrigasira		19. Mula
6. Ardra		20. Purvashadh
7. Punarvasu		21. Uttarashadh
8. Pushya 		22. Shravana
9. Aslesha         	23. Dhanishtha
10. Magha          	24. Satabhisha
11. Purvaphalguni  	25. Purvabhadra
12. Uttaraphalguni 	26. Uttarabhadra
13. Hasta          	27. Revati
14.  Chitra

The names of the grahas are given in sloka 10 of this chapter.

Lagna is a very important point in the horoscope. It is the rashi that rises in the east, on the latitude of birth. The apparent rising of a rashi is due to the rotation of the earth on its own axis at a rate of motion causing every degree of the zodiac seemingly ascend on the eastern horizon.

Approximately, two hours are required for a rashi to pass via the horizon, thereby every degree taking four minutes to ascend. This duration, however, is actually dependent on the concerned latitude.

Actually, Surya has no motion. His motion is an apparent one as viewed from the rotating earth. Other grahas including the nodes have varied rates of motion. The average daily motions of the grahas, which are not, however standard, are as follows:

Surya  1
Chandr 13-15
Mangal 30-45'
Buddh  65-100'
Shukr  62-82'
Guru   5-15'
Shani  2'
Rahu/Ketu 3'

With such different motions, a grah forms various drishti's with others. These drishti's through longitudinal distances have a great deal of utility in Jyotish. This is what Maharishi Parashar suggests to be considered.

7. Details (of astronomical nature) of stars have to be understood by general rules while I narrate to you about the effects of grahas and rashis.

8-9. The positions of the grahas for a given time be taken as per Drikganit. And with the help of rashi durations applicable to the respective places, Lagn at birth should be known. Now, I tell you about the castes, descriptions, and dispositions of the grahas.

10. Names of grahas: The names of the nine grahas respectively are: Surya, Chandr, Mangal, Buddh, Guru, Shukr, Shani, Rahu, and Ketu.

11. Benefics and Malefics: Among these, Surya, Shani, Mangal, decreasing Chandr, Rahu, and Ketu (the ascending and the descending nodes of Chandr) are malefics while the rest are benefics. Buddh, however, is a malefic if he joins a malefic.

[addition from Santhanam till sloka 12-13]

When Chandr  is ahead of Surya but within 120, she has medium strength. Between 120 to 240 she is very auspicious, see ('Atishubhapred'). From 240 to O she is bereft of strength. This is Yavanas' view, vide P. 70 of my English Translation of Saravali. This view is, however, related to Chandr's strength or otherwise, while waning Chandr (Krishna  Paksh or dark half Chandr) is a malefic and waxing Chandr  (Shukla Paksh or bright half Chandr) is a benefic.

Should Chandr  be Yuti with a benefic or receiving a drishti from a benefic, she turns a benefic, even if in a waning state.

As regards Buddh, we have clear instructions from Maharishi Parashar, that he becomes a malefic if he joins a malefic.

If waning Chandr and Buddh are together, both are benefics.

12-13. Grah governances: Surya is the soul of all. Chandr is the mind. Mangal is one's strength. Buddh is speech-giver, while Guru confers Knowledge and happiness. Shukr governs semen (potency), while Shani denotes grief.

14-15. Grah cabinet: Of royal status are Surya and Chandr, while Mangal is the army chief. Prince-apparent is Buddh. The ministerial grahas are Guru and Shukr. Shani is a servant. Rahu and Ketu form the grah army.

16-17. Complexions of grahas: Surya is blood-red. Chandr is tawny. Mangal who is not very tall is blood-red, while Buddh's hue is akin to that of green grass. Tawny, variegated, and dark are Guru, Shukr, and Shani in their order.

18. Deities of grahas: Fire (Agni), Water (Varuna), Subrahmanya (Lord Shiva's son following Ganesh). Maha Vishnu, Indra, Shachi Devi (the consort of Lord Indra), and Brahma are the presiding deities of the 7 grahas in their order.

19. Gender of the grahas: Buddh and Shani are neuters. Chandr and Shukr are females, while Surya, Mangal, and Guru are males.

20. Primordial compounds: The Panchabhutas, space, air, fire, water, and earth, are respectively governed by Guru, Shani, Mangal, Shukr, and Buddh.

21. Castes of grahas: Guru and Shukr are Brahmins. Surya is a royal grah while Chandr and Buddh belong to commercial community. Shani rules the Sudras (4th caste).

22. Sattvic grahas are the luminaries and Guru; Shukr and Buddh are Rajasik; while Mangal and Shani are Tamasic grahas.

23. Description of Surya: Surya's eyes are honey coloured. He has a square body. He is of clean habits, bilious, intelligent and has limited hair (on his head).

24. Description of Chandr: Chandr  is very windy and phlegmatic. She is learned and has a round body. She has auspicious looks and sweet speech, is fickle-minded and very lustful.

25. Description of Mangal: Mangal has blood-red eyes, is fickle-minded, liberal, bilious, given to anger and has thin waist and thin physique.

26. Description of Buddh: Buddh is endowed with an attractive physique and the capacity to use words with many meanings. He is fond of jokes. He has a mix of all the three humours.

27. Description of Guru: Guru has a big body, tawny hair and tawny eyes, is phlegmatic, intelligent and learned in all Shastras.

28. Description of Shukr: Shukr is charming, has a splendourous physique, is excellent or great in disposition, has charming eyes, is a poet, is phlegmatic and windy, and has curly hair.

29. Description of Shani: Shani has an emaciated and long physique, has tawny eyes, is windy in temperament has big teeth, is indolent and lame and has coarse hair.

30. Description of Rahu and Ketu: Rahu has smoky appearance with a blue mix physique. He resides in forests and is horrible. He is windy in temperament and is intelligent. Ketu is akin to Rahu.

31. Primary ingredients (or Sapth dhatus): Bones, blood, marrow, skin, fat, semen and muscles are respectively denoted by the grahas: Surya, Chandr, Mangal, Buddh, Guru, Shukr, and Shani.

32. Abodes of the grahas: Temple, watery place, place of fire, sport-ground, treasure-house, bed-room and filthy ground: these are respectively the abodes for the seven grahas from Surya onward.

33. Grah periods: Ayan, Muhurta, a day (consisting day and night), Ritu, month, fortnight and year: These are the periods allotted to the grahas from Surya to Shani.

34. Tastes of the grahas : Pungent, saline, bitter, mixed, sweet, acidulous, and astringent are respectively tastes lorded by Surya, Chandr, Mangal, Buddh, Guru, Shukr, and Shani.

35-38. Strengths of grahas: Strong in the east  are Buddh and Guru. Surya and Mangal are so in the south, while Shani is the only grah that derives strength in the west. Chandr and Shukr are endowed with vigour when in the north. Again, strong during night are Chandr, Mangal, and Shani while Buddh is strong during day and night. The rest (i.e. Guru, Surya, and Shukr) are strong only in daytime. During the dark half malefics are strong. Benefics acquire strength in the bright half of the month. Malefics and benefics are respectively strong in Dakshinayan and Uttarayan. The lords of the year, month, day, and Hora (hour of grah) are stronger than the other in ascending order. Again, stronger than the other in the ascending are: Shani, Mangal, Buddh, Guru, Shukr, Chandr, and Surya.

39-40. Related to trees: Surya rules strong trees (i.e. trees with stout trunks). Shani useless trees, Chandr milky trees and rubber yielding plants), Mangal bitter ones (like lemon plants), Shukr floral plants, Guru fruitful ones and Buddh fruitless ones.

41-44. Other matters: Rahu rules the outcaste while Ketu governs mixed caste. Shani and the nodes indicate anthills. Rahu denotes multi-coloured clothes and Ketu rags. Lead and blue gem belong to Rahu and Ketu. Surya, Chandr, Mangal, Buddh, Guru, Shukr, and Shani in their order govern red silken, white silken, red, black silken, saffron, silken, and multi-coloured robes.

45-46. Seasons of grahas: Vasanta, Greeshma, Varsh, Sarad, Hemanta, and Sisir are the six Ritus (or seasons) respectively governed by Shukr, Mangal, Chandr, Buddh, Guru and Shani. Rahu and Ketu denote 8 months and 3 months respectively.

47. Dhatu, Mool, and Jiva Divisions: Dhatu grahas are Rahu, Mangal, Shani and Chandr, while Surya and Shukr are Mula grahas. Buddh, Guru, and Ketu rule Jivas.

48. Age: Out of all the grahas Shani is the eldest (i.e. with the highest age). He bestows maximum number of years in Naisargik Dasha.

49-50. Exaltation and Debilitation: For the seven grahas from Surya on, the exaltation rashis are respectively Mesh, Vrishabh, Makar, Kanya, Kark, Meen, and Tula. The deepest exaltation degrees are respectively 10, 3, 28, 15, 5, 27, and 20 in those rashis. And in the seventh rashi from the said exaltation rashi each grah has its own debilitation. The same degrees of deep exaltation apply to deep fall.

51-54. Additional Dignities: In Simh the first 20 degrees are Surya's Mooltrikon while the rest is his own bhava. After the first 3 degrees of exaltation portion in Vrishabh, for Chandr, the rest is her Mooltrikon. Mangal has the first 12 degrees in Mesh as Mooltrikon with the rest therein becoming simply his own bhava. For Buddh, in Kanya the first 15 degrees are exaltation zone, the next 5 degrees Mooltrikon, and the last 10 degrees are own bhava. The first one third of Dhanu is the Mooltrikon of Guru while, the remaining part thereof is his own bhava. Shukr divides Tula into two halves keeping the first as Mooltrikon and the second as own bhava. Shani's arrangements are same in Kumbh as Surya has in Simh. 

55. Natural Relationships: Note the rashis which are the 2nd, 4th, 5th, 8th, 9th, and 12th from the Mooltrikon of a grah. The grahas ruling such rashis are its friends, apart from the lord of its exaltation rashi. Lords other than these are its enemies. If a grah becomes its friend as well as its enemy (on account of the said two computations) then it is neutral or equal. 

56. Temporary Relationships: The grah posited in the 2nd, 3rd, 4th,10th, 11th, or the 12th from another becomes a mutual friend. There is enmity otherwise. (This applies to a given Janm Kundali). 

57-58. Compound Relationship: Should two grahas be naturally and temporarily friendly, they become extremely friendly. Friendship on one count and neutrality on another count make them friendly. Enmity on one count combined with affinity on the other turns into equality. Enmity and neutralship cause only enmity. Should there be enmity in both manners, extreme enmity is obtained. The Jyotishi should consider these and declare horoscopic effects accordingly.

59-60. Ratio of Effects: A grah in exaltation gives fully good effects while in Mooltrikon it is bereft of its auspicious effects by one fourth. It is half beneficial in its own bhava. Its beneficence is one fourth in a friendly rashi. In an equal's rashi one eighth of auspicious disposition is useful. The good effects are nil in debilitation or enemy's camp. Inauspicious effects are quite reverse with reference to what is stated. 

61-64. Non-luminous Upagrahas (Sub-grahas): Add 4 rashis 13 degrees and 20 minutes of arc to Surya's longitude at a given moment to get the exact position of the all inauspicious Dhoom. Reduce Dhoom from 12 rashis to arrive at Vyatipat. Vyatipat is also inauspicious. Add six rashis to Vyatipat to know the position of Parivesh. He is extremely inauspicious. Deduct Parivesh from 12 rashis to arrive at the position of Chap (Indra Dhanus) who is also inauspicious. Add 16 degrees 40 minutes to Chap which will give Ketu (Upaketu) who is a malefic. By adding a rashi to Upaketu, you get the original longitude of Surya. These are the grahas devoid of splendour which are malefics by nature and cause affliction.

65. Effects of Sub-grahas: If one of these afflicts Surya, the native's dynasty will decline, while Chandr and Lagn respectively associated with one of these will destroy the longevity and wisdom. So declared Lord Brahma, the lotus-born.

66-69. Calculations of Gulik, etc.: The portions of Surya etc. up to Shani denote the periods of Gulik and others. Divide the day duration (of any week day) into eight equal parts. The eighth portion is lord-less. The seven portions are distributed to the seven grahas commencing from the lord of the week day. Whichever portion is ruled by Shani will be the portion of Gulik. Similarly, make the night duration into eight equal parts and distribute these commencing from the lord of the 5th week. Here again, the eighth portion is lord-less while Shani's portion is Gulik. Surya's portion is Kaal, Mangal's portion is Mrityu, Guru's portion is Yamaghantak, and Buddh's portion is Ardhaprahar. These durations differently apply to different places (commensurate with variable day and night durations) 

70. Gulik's Position: The degree ascending at the time of start of Gulik's portion (as above) will be the longitude of Gulik at a given place. Based on this longitude only, Gulik's effects for a particular nativity be estimated. 

71-74. Calculation of Pranapad: Convert the given time into vighatis and divide the same by 15. The resultant rashi, degrees, etc. be added to Surya if he is in a movable rashi which will yield Pranapad. If Surya is in a fixed rashi, add 240 degrees additionally and if in a dual rashi add 120 degrees in furtherance to get Pranapad. 

The birth will be auspicious if Pranapad falls in the 2nd, 5th, 9th, 4th, 10th, or 11th from the natal Lagn. In other bhavas, Pranapad indicates an inauspicious birth. 

Notes: Ardhaprahar, Yamaghantak, Mrityu, Kaal, and Gulik are the 5 Kaal Velas, suggested by Maharishi Parashar. The day duration according to altitude is divided into eight equal parts. The eight portion is unlorded. The first portion is allotted to the weekday lord. Other portions follow in the order of week-day lords. We consider 5 portions of grahas ignoring that of Chandr and Shukr. The portions of Surya, Mangal, Buddh, Guru, and Shani are respectively called , Mrityu, Ardhaprahar, Yamaghantak, and Gulik. 

In the case of night, the durations or 1/8th parts are allotted in a different order. The first portion goes to the grah ruling the 5th weekday lord counted from the day in question. The others follow in the usual order. Here again, the 8th part is lord-less. The portions of grahas from Kaal to Gulik are the same in nomenclature, in the night also. Keeranuru Nataraja of Jatakalankaram (Tamil version) gives rashis of dignities for these Upagrahas and Gulik, etc..: 

Upagrah Exaltation Debilitation Swakshetra & Gulik, etc. (own rashi) Dhoom Simh Kumbh Makar Vyatipat Vrischik Vrishabh Mithun Parivesh Mithun Dhanu Dhanu Indrachap Dhanu Mithun Kark Upaketu Kumbh Simh Kark Gulik - - Kumbh Yamaghantak - - Dhanu Ardhaprahar - - Mithun Kaal - - Makar Mrityu - - Vrischik >From Surya to Shani, no one is exalted in the above mentioned exaltation rashis, nor debilitated in the above mentioned debilitation rashis. Out of the 5 Kaal Velas, viz. Gulik, etc. four except Kaal (related to Surya) have their own rashi system in the respective rashis ruled by their fathers. Gulik, son of Shani, has Kumbh as his own bhava. Guru's son, Yamaghantak, has it in Dhanu. 

Ardhaprahar, Buddh's son, is in own rashi if in Mithun. Mrityu, son of Mangal, has Vrischik as own bhava. It is not known why Kaal, a son of Surya shifted to Makar, a rashi of his brother (Shani) leaving his father's Simh . Obviously, Shani has given his Mooltrikon to his son Gulik while he gave Makar (a secondary rashi) to his 'brother' Kaal. 


Chapter 4
Zodiacal Rashis Described 

1-2. Importance of Hora: The word Hora is derived from Ahoratr after dropping the first and last syllables. Thus, Hora (lagnas) remains in between Ahoratr (i.e. day and night) and after knowing Hora, the good and bad effects of a native be known. Shri Vishnu, the Invisible is Time personified. His limbs are the 12 rashis commencing from Mesh. 

3. Names of Rashis: The 12 rashis of the zodiac in order are: Mesh,Vrishabh, Mithun, Kark, Simh , Kanya, Tula, Vrischik, Dhanu, Makar, Kumbh, and Meen.

4-41/2. Limbs of Kaal Purush: Kaal Purush (or time personified) has his limbs as under with reference to the 12 rashis respectively: Head, face, arms, heart, stomach, hip, space below navel, privities, thighs, knees, ankles, and feet. 

5-5 1/2. Classification of Rashis : Movable, Fixed, and Dual are the names given to the 12 rashis in order. These are again known as malefic and benefic, successively. Similarly, are male and female. Mesh, Simh, and Dhanu are bilious. Vrishabh, Kanya, and Makar are windy. Mithun, Tula, and Kumbh are mixed, while the rest are phlegmatic.

6-7. Mesh described: The Mesh is blood-red in complexion. lt has a prominent (big) physique. It is a quadruped rashi and strong during night. It denotes courage. It resides in the east and is related to kings. It wanders in hills and predominates in Rajo-gun (the second of the three constituent qualities and the cause of great activity in living beings). It rises with its back (a Prishtodaya rashi) and is fiery. Its ruler is Mangal.

8. Vrishabh described: Vrishabh's complexion is white, and is lorded by Shukr. It is long and is a quadruped rashi. It has strength in night and resides in the south. It represents villages and businessmen. An earthy rashi, Vrishabh rises with its back.

9-9 1/2. Mithun described: The rashi Mithun rises with its head and represents a male and a female holding a mace and lute. It lives in the west and is an, airy rashi. It is a biped rashi as well and is strong in nights. It lives in villages and is windy in temperament. It has an even body with a green (grass like) hue. Its ruler is Buddh.

10-11. Kark described: The rashi Kark is pale-red. It resorts to forests and represents Brahmins. It is strong in nights. It has many feet (i.e. it is a centipede rashi) and has a bulky body. It is Sattvic in disposition (seen in gods) and it is a watery rashi. It rises with its back and is ruled by Chandr.

12. Simh described: Simh is ruled by Surya and is Sattvic. It is a quadruped rashi and a royal rashi. It resorts to forests and rises with its head. It has a large, white body. It resides in the east and is strong during daytime.

13-14. Kanya described: This rashi is a hill-resorter, and is strong in daytime. It rises with its head and has a medium build. It is a biped rashi and resides in the south. It has grains and fire in its hands. It belongs to the business community and is variegated. It relates to hurricanes ('Prabharanjani'). It is a Virgin and is Tamasic (a disposition of demons). Its ruler is Buddh.

15-16 1/2. Tula described: Tula is a Seershodaya rashi rising with its head; Tula is strong in daytime. It is black in complexion and is predominant with Rajo-gun. It relates to the western direction and resorts to land. It is destructive or mischievous ('Dhatin'). It represents Sudras or the 4th Varna. It has a medium build physique and is a biped rashi. Its lord is Shukr.

Vrischik described: Vrischik has a slender physique and is a centipede rashi. It denotes Brahmins and resides in holes. Its direction is north and is strong in daytime. It is reddish-brown and resorts to water and land. It has a hairy physique and is very sharp (or passionate). Mangal is its ruler.

17-18 1/2. Dhanu described: The rashi Dhanu rises with its head and is lorded by Guru. It is a Sattvic rashi and is tawny in hue. It has strength in night and is fiery. A royal rashi, Dhanu is biped in first half. Its second half is quadruped. It has an even build and adores an arch. It resides in the east, resorts to land and is splendourous.

19-20. Makar described: Makar is lorded by Shani and has predominance of Tamo-gun (a disposition seen in demons). It is an earthy rashi and represents the southern direction. It is strong in nights, and rises with back. It has a large body. Its complexion is variegated and it resorts to both forests and lands. Its first half is quadruped and its second half footless moving in water.

21-21 1/2. Kumbh described: The rashi Kumbh represents a man holding a pot. Its complexion is deep-brown. It has medium build and a biped rashi. It is very strong in daytime. It resorts to deep water and is airy. It rises with its head and is Tamasic. It rules Sudras, the 4th Varna, and the west. Its lord is Shani, Surya's offspring. 

22-24. Meen described: Meen resembles a pair of fish, one tailed with the head of the other. This rashi is strong at night. It is a watery rashi and is predominant with Sattwa-gun. It denotes resoluteness and is a water-resorter. It is footless and has a medium build. It rules the north and rises with both head and back. It is ruled by Guru. This is how the twelve rashis each of 30 degrees extent are described to evaluate gross and specific effects. 

25-30. Nishek Lagn: O excellent of Maharishis, now is a step explained to arrive at the Nishek Lagn when the natal Lagn is known. Note the angular distance between Shani and Mandi (Gulik). Add this to the difference between the Lagn bhava (Madhya or cusp) and the 9th bhava (cusp). The resultant product in rashis, degrees, etc. will represent the months, days, etc. that elapsed between Nishek and birth. At birth if Lagn lord is in the invisible half (i.e. from Lagn cusp to descendental cusp) add the degrees, etc. Chandr moved in the particular rashi occupied by her to the above mentioned product. Then, Lagn at Nishek can be worked out and the good and bad experienced by the native in the womb can be guessed. One can also guess, with the help of Nishek Lagn, effects like longevity, death, etc. of the parents.


Chapter 5
Special Lagnas 

1. Oh excellent of the Brahmins, I explain below again some special Lagnas, viz. Bhava Lagn, Hora Lagn, and Ghati Lagn. 

2-3. Bhava Lagn: From sunrise to the time of birth every 5 ghatis (or 120 minutes) constitute one Bhava Lagn. Divide the time of birth (in ghatis, vighatis, etc.) from sunrise by 5 and add the quotient etc. to Surya's longitude as at sunrise. This is called Bhava Lagn. 

4-5. Hora Lagn: Again from sunrise till the time of birth, Hora Lagn repeats itself every 21/2 ghatis (i. e. 60 minutes). Divide the time past up to birth from sunrise by 2 1/2 and add the quotient etc. in rashis, degrees, and so on to the longitude of Surya as at the sunrise. This will yield Hora Lagn in rashi, degrees, etc.. 

6-8. Ghati Lagn (Ghatik Lagn): Now listen to the method of working out Ghati Lagn. This Lagn changes along with every Ghati (24 minutes) from the sunrise. Note birth time in ghatis and vighatis. Consider the number of ghatis past as number of rashis or Ghati Lagnas. The vighatis be divided by 2 to arrive at degrees and minutes of arc past in the said Ghati Lagn. The product so arrived in rashis, degrees, and minutes be added to Surya's longitude as at sunrise to get the exact location of Ghati Lagn. So, say Maharishis like Narada. 

9. Use of Special Lagnas: Keeping the grahas at birth as it is, prepare various bhava kundalis with respect to each special Lagn and analyze as done for the natal Lagn. 

10-13 1/2. Varnad Dasha: I now detail Varnad Dasha just by knowing which, one can deal with the longevity of a native. If the natal Lagn is an odd rashi count directly from to natal Lagn. If the natal Lagn is an even rashi, count from Meen to the natal Lagn, in the reverse order. Similarly, if the Hora Lagn is an odd one, count from Mesh to Hora Lagn in direct order. If the Hora Lagn is an even one, count from Meen to Hora Lagn in the reverse order. If both the products are odd rashis or even rashis, then add both the figures. If one is odd and the other is even, then know the difference between the two products. If the latest product, in this process, is an odd one, count so many rashis from Mesh in a direct manner, if an even one, count so many rashis from Meen in reverse order. The rashi so known will be the Varnad for Lagn. 

14-15. Effects of Varnad: Now, listen to the use of the above. Out of the two, viz. natal Lagn and Hora Lagn, whichever is stronger, from there Varnad starts. If the natal Lagn is an old rashi, the counting of dashas is clockwise, otherwise anticlockwise. Lagn dasha years will equal the number of rashis intervening between the natal Lagn and Varnad. Similarly, for other bhavas. 

16-20. Effects of Varnad (cont.): Should a Kon from Lagn 's Varnad be occupied or drishtied by a malefic, the native will live only up to the dasha of the said rashi. Just as the Rudra grah in Sool Dasha is capable of causing evils, the above mentioned grahas related to Varnad's Kon be treated. The Varnad Lagn be considered as natal Lagn while the 7th from Varnad will denote the longevity of the spouse, the 11th longevity of elder brothers and sisters, the 3rd longevity of younger brothers and sisters, the 5th the longevity of sons, the 4th longevity of mother and the 9th longevity of father. The Dasha of the Sool rashi will inflict greater evils. 

21-24. Effects of Varnad (cont.): Similar assessments be made with reference to the Varnad of each bhava commencing the first and the evils and goods due to a nativity be known. These Varnad Dashas are only for bhavas (rashis) and not their occupants. The sub period of each Dasha will be one twelfth of the Dasha and the order will also be clockwise or anti-clockwise as explained earlier. The natal Lagn is to be calculated according to birth place while Bhava Lagn, Hora Lagn, etc., are common to all places. 


Chapter 6
The Sixteen Divisions of a Rashi 

1. O Maharishi Parashar, I have known from you about the grahas, rashis, and their descriptions. I desire to know the details of various divisions of a rashi, will you please narrate. 

2-4. Names of the 16 Vargas: Lord Brahma has described 16 kinds of Vargas (Divisions) for each rashi. Listen to those. The names are: Rashi, Hora, Dreshkan, Chaturthamsh, Saptamsh, Navamsh, Dashamsh, Dvadashamsh, Shodashamsh, Vimshamsh, Chaturvimshamsh, Saptavimshamsh, Trimshamsh, Khavedamsh, Akshavedamsh, and Shashtiamsh. 

5-6. Rashi and Hora: The rashi owned by a grah is called its Kshetra. The first half of an odd rashi is the Hora ruled by Surya. While the second half is the Hora of Chandr. The reverse is true in the case of an even rashi. Half of a rashi is called Hora. These are totally 24 counted from Mesh and repeated twice (at the rate of 12) in the whole of the zodiac. 

7-8. Dreshkan: One third of a rashi is called Dreshkan (Dreshkan). These are totally 36, counted from Mesh (to Meen), repeating thrice at the rate of 12 per round. The 1st, 5th, and the 9th rashis from a rashi are its three Dreshkanas, and are respectively lorded by Narada, Agasthya and Durvash. 

9. Chaturthamsh: The lords of the 4 Kendras from a rashi are the rulers of respective Chaturthamsh of a rashi commencing from Mesh. Each Chaturthamsh is one fourth of a rashi. The deities respectively are Sanak, Sanand, Kumar, and Sanatan. 

10-11. Saptamsh: The Saptamsh (one seventh of a rashi) counting commences from the same rashi in the case of an odd rashi. It is from the seventh rashi there of while an even rashi is considered. The names of the seven divisions in odd rashis are : Kshaar, Ksheer, Dadhi, Ghrith, Ikshu, Ras, Madhya, and Suddh Jal. These designations are reversed for an even rashi. 

12. Navamsh: The Navamsh calculation are for a movable rashi from there itself, for a fixed rashi from the 9th thereof and for a dual rashi from the 5th thereof. They go by designations Deva (divine), Manushya (human), and Rakshasa (devilish) in a successive and repetitive order for a movable rashi. (Manushya, Rakshasa and Deva are the order for a fixed rashi while Rakshasa, Manushya, and Deva are a dual rashi's order.) 

13-14. Dashamsh: Starting from the same rashi for an odd rashi and from the 9th with reference to an even rashi, the 10 Dashamshas each of 3 degrees are reckoned. These are presided over by the ten rulers of the cardinal directions, viz. Indra, Agni, Yama, Rakshasa, Varuna, Vayu, Kuber, Isan, Brahma, and Ananth in case of an odd rashi. It is in the reverse order that these presiding deities are reckoned when an even rashi is given. 

15. Dvadashamsh: The reckoning of the Dvadashamsh (one twelfth of a rashi or 2 1/2 degrees each) commences from the same rashi. In each rashi the presidentship repeats thrice in the order of Ganesh, Ashvini, Kumar, Yama, and Sarpa for the 12 Dvadashamshas. 

16. Shodashamsh (or Kalamsh): Starting from Mesh for a movable rashi, from Simh for a fixed rashi and from Dhanu for a dual rashi, the 16 Shodashamshas (16th part of a rashi i.e. of 152' 30") are regularly distributed. The presiding deities of these repeat in the order Brahma, Vishnu, Shiva, and Surya four times in the case of an odd rashi. It is reverse in the case of an even rashi that these ruling deities are understood. 

17-21. Vimshamsh: From Mesh for a movable rashi, from Dhanu from a fixed rashi and from Simh for a common rashi: this is how the calculations of Vimshamshas ( 1/20th of a rashi or 1 degree 30' each) are to commerce. The presiding deities of the 20 Vimshamshas are in an odd rashi are respectively: Kali, Gauri, Jaya, Lakshmi, Vijaya, Vimal, Sati, Tara, Jvalamukhi, Sveta, Lalita, Bagalamukhi, Pratyangir, Shachi, Raudri, Bhavani, Varad, Jaya, Tripura, and Sumukhi. In an even rashi these 20 deities respectively are: Daya, Megha, Chinnasi, Pisachini, Dhumavathi; Matangi, Bal, Bhadr, Arun, Anal, Pingal, Chuchchuk, Ghora, Vaarahi, Vaishnavi, Sita, Bhuvanesvari, Bhairavi, Mangal, and Aparajit. 

22-23. Chaturvimshamsh: The Chaturvimshamsh (1/24th part of a rashi or 115 each) distribution commences from Simh and Kark respectively for an odd and an even rashi. In the case of an odd rashi the ruling deities repeat twice in the order of Skand, Parusdhar, Anal, Vishwakarma, Bhag, Mitr, Maya, Antaka, Vrisha-dwaja, Govinda Madan, and Bhima. Reverse these from Bhima (to Skand) twice to know the deities for the Chaturvimshamsh in an even rashi. 

24-26. Saptavimshamsh (Nakshatramsh or Bhamsh): The Saptavimshamsh lords are respectively the presiding deities of the 27 Nakshatras as under: Dastra (Ashvini Kumar), Yama, Agni, Brahma, Chandr, Isa, Adhiti, Jiva, Ahi, Pitar, Bhag, Aryama, Surya, Tvasht, Marut, Chakragni, Mitr, Vasava, Rakshasa, Varuna, Vishwadeva, Govinda, Vasu, Varuna, Ajap, Ahirbuddhnya, and Pushya. These are for an odd rashis. Count these deities in a reverse order for an even rashi. The Saptavimshamsh distribution commences from Mesh and other movable rashis for all the 12 rashis. 

27-28. Trimshamsh: The Trimshamsh lords for an odd rashi are: Mangal, Shani, Guru, Buddh, and Shukr. Each of them in order rules 5, 5, 8, 7, and 5 degrees, The deities ruling over the Trimshamshas are respectively, Agni, Vayu, Indra, Kuber, and Varuna. Tn the case of an even rashi, the quantum of Trimshamsh, grah lordship and deities get reversed. 

29-30. Khavedamsh (or Chatvarimshamsh): (1/40th part of a rashi): For odd rashis count from Mesh and for an even rashi from Tula in respect of Khavedamshas (each of 45' of arc). Vishnu, Chandr, Marichi, Tvasht, Dhata, Shiva, Ravi, Yama, Yaksh, Gandharv, Kaal, and Varuna repeat successively as presiding deities in the same order for all rashis. 

31-32. Akshavedamsh: (1/45th part of a rashi): Mesh, Simh, and Dhanu are the rashis from which the distributions respectively commence for movable, immovable, and common rashis. In movable rashis, Brahma, Shiva, and Vishnu; in immovable rashis Shiva, Vishnu, and Brahma and in common rashis Vishnu, Brahma, and Shiva repeat 15 times the presidentship over these Akshavedamshas. 

33-41. Shashtiamsh: (1/60th part of a rashi or half a degree each): To calculate the Shashtiamsh lord, ignore the rashi position of a grah and take the degrees, etc., it traversed in that rashi. Multiply that figure by 2 and divide the degrees by 12. Add 1 to the remainder which will indicate the rashi in which the Shashtiamsh falls. The lord of that rashi is the grah ruling the said Shashtiamsh. In odd rashis, the names of Shashtiamshas are:1.Ghora, 2.Rakshasa, 3.Deva, 4.Kuber, 5.Yaksh, 6.Kindar, 7.Bhrasht, 8.Kulaghna, 9.Garal, 10.Vahni, 11.Maya, 12.Purishak, 13.Apampathi, 14.Marutwan, 15.Kaal, 16.Sarpa, 17.Amrit. 18.Indu, 19.Mridu, 20. Komal, 21.Heramba, 22.Brahma, 23.Vishnu, 24.Maheshwara, 25.Deva, 26.Ardr, 27.Kalinas, 28.Kshitees, 29.Kamalakar, 30.Gulik, 31.Mrityu, 32.Kaal, 33.Davagni, 34.Ghora, 35.Yama, 36 Kantak, 37.Suddh, 38.Amrit, 39.Purnachandr, 40.Vishadagdha, 41.Kulanas, 42.Vamshakshaya, 43.Utpat, 44.Kaal, 45.Saumya, 46.Komal, 47.Sheetal, 48.Karaladamshtr, 49.Chandramukhi, 50.Praveen, 51.Kaalpavak, 52 Dhannayudh, 53.Nirmal, 54.Saumya, 55.Krur, 56.Atisheetal, 57.Amrit, 58.Payodhi, 59.Brahman, 60.Chandrarekha (Indurekha). 

The reverse is the order for even rashis in so much as these names are cased. Grahas in benefic Shashtiamshas produce auspicious, while the opposite is true in case of grahas in malefic Shashtiamshas. 

42-53. Varg Classification: Maitreya, explained now are the sum effects of classifications of different divisions (or vargas so far narrated). These are four kinds, viz. Shad Varg (6 divisions considered), Sapth Varg (7 divisions considered), Dasha Varg (10 divisions considered) and Shodasha Varg (all the 16 divisions considered). In the Shadvarg classification, the varg designations are Kimshuk, Vyanjan, Chamar, Chatr, and Kundal according to a grah being in 2 to 6 combinations of good vargas. Next is the Sapth varg in which these classifications continue in the same manner up to six combinations of good vargas, the 7th additional varg getting classified as Mukut. In the Dasha Varg scheme, the designations commence from Parijata etc. such as 2 good Vargas-Parijatha, 3. Uttama, 4. Gopur, 5. Simhsan, 6. Paravata, 7. Devaloka, 8. Brahmaloka, 9. Sakravahana, and 10. Vargas-Shridham. In the Shodasha Varg scheme the combinations of vargas go with designations thus: two good Vargas-Bhedak, 3. Kusum, 4. Nagapushpa, 5. Kanduk, 6. Kerala, 7. Kalpa Vriksha, 8. Chandan Vana, 9. Purnachandr, 10. Uchchaisrava, 11. Dhanvantari, 12.Suryakant, 13. Vidrum, 14. Chakra-simhasan, 15. Golok, and 16. Vargas-Shri Vallabh. In these divisions, the divisions falling in the grah's exaltation rashi, Mooltrikon rashi, own rashi, and the rashis owned by the lord of a Kendra from the Arudha Lagn are all to be considered (as good vargas). The divisions of a combust grah, defeated grah, weak grah and a grah in bad Avasthas like Sayan be all ignored to be auspicious, for these destroy the good Yogas. 


Chapter 7
Divisional Considerations 

1-8. Use of the 16 Divisions: Now, I will explain the use of these sixteen divisions. The physique from Lagn, wealth from Hora, happiness through co-born from Dreshkan, fortunes from Chaturthamsh, sons and grandsons from Saptamsh, spouse from Navamsh, power (and position) from Dashamsh, parents from Dvadashamsh, benefits and adversities through conveyances from Shodashamsh, worship from Vimshamsh, learning from Chaturvimshamsh strength and weakness from Saptavimshamsh, evil effects from Trimshamsh, auspicious and inauspicious effects from Khavedamsh, and all indications from both Akshavedamsh and Shashtiamsh: these are the considerations to be made through the respective vargas. The bhava whose lord is in a malefic Shashtiamsh will diminish, so say Garga and others. The bhava whose lord is in a benefic Shodashamsh flourish. This is how the 16 vargas are to be evaluated. 

9-12. After assessing the 20 point strength of the ascending degree, of other bhavas, and of the grahas, the good and bad effects be declared. I explain below the method of knowing the Vimsopak strength (20 point strength) just by knowing which an idea of the results of actions of this birth and of former birth will clearly emerge. The grahas from Surya on get full strength when in exaltation or in own rashi and are bereft of strength when in the 7th (from exaltation). In between, the strength be known by the rule of three process. In the case of a grah owning two rashis, distinction of placement in odd/even rashi identical with own rashi be made. 

13-16. Hora, Dreshkan, and Trimshamsh Effects: Guru, Surya, and Mangal give (pronounced) effects in the Hora of Surya. Chandr, Shukr, and Shani do so when in Chandr's Horas; Buddh is effective in both the Horas. In the case of an even rashi the hora of Chandr will be powerful in effects while Surya's hora in an odd rashi will be so. Full, medium, and nil will be the effects respectively in the beginning middle and the end of a hora. Similar applications be made for a Dreshkan, Turyamsh, Navamsh, etc.. 

As for Trimshamsh effects Surya is akin to Mangal and Chandr is akin to Shukr. The effects applicable to Rashi will apply to Trimshamsh. 

17-19. Vimshopak Bal: The Shad Vargas (six divisions) consist of Rashi, Hora, Dreshkan, Navamsh, Dvadashamsh, and Trimshamsh. The full Bal, for each of the divisions respectively are 6, 2, 4, 5, 2, and 1. This is the Vimshopak Bal relating to Shad Varg division. Adding the Saptamsh to the Shad Vargas, we get Sapt Varg, the Vimshopak Bal for which is: 5, 2, 3, 2 1/2, 4 1/2, 2, and 1. These are gross strengths, while subtle ones should be understood by exact positions. 

20. Add Dashamsh, Shodashamsh, and Shashtiamsh to the said Sapt Varg Divisions, to get the scheme of Dasha Varg (10 divisions). The Vimshopak Bal in this context is 3 for Rashi, 5 for Shashtiamsh, and for the other 8 divisions, 1 1/2 each. 

21-25. When the 16 divisions (Shodash Varg Scheme) are considered together, the Vimshopak score goes thus: Hora 1, Trimsamsh 1, Dreshkan 1, Shodashamsh 2, Navamsh 3, Rashi 3 1/2, Shashtiamsh 4, and the rest of the nine divisions each a half. The Vimshopak Bal remains as 20 (in the above computations) only when the grah is in own bhava vargas. Otherwise, the total strength from 20 declines to 18 in Pramudit vargas, to 15 in Shant vargas, to 10 in Svasth divisions, to 7 in Duhkhit vargas and to 5 in Khal vargas. (These figures are called Varg Vishwa.) 

26-27. Vimshopak Proportional Evaluation. Multiply the figure due to full strength for the division by the varg Vishwa and divide by 20 to get the exact strength of the grah. If the such total is below 5 the grah will not be capable of giving auspicious results. If it is above 5 but below 10, the grah will yield some good effects. Later on, up to 15 it is indicative of mediocre effect. A grah with above 15 will yield wholly favourable effects. 


28-29. Other Sources of Strength: Maitreya, there are other kinds of sources as I explain below. Grahas in the 7th from Surya will be fully effective. One with an identical longitude in comparison to Surya's will destroy the good effects. Rule of three process be applied to the grah in between these positions. 

30-32. Dasha effects with Vimshopak Bal: Maitreya, after assessing the Vimshopak Bal through the various divisions, the rising and setting of the grahas be considered. The Vimshopak Bal is classified under: Purna, Atipurna, Madhya, Atimadhya, Heen, Atiheen, Swalpa, and Atiswalp. Thus, should be classified the Vimshopak Bal and the Dasha period results declared accordingly. 

33-36. Kendras, Konas, etc., Defined: O Maitreya, listen to other matters which I am explaining. The Kendras are specially known as Lagn (the ascendent), Bandhu Bhava, Yuvati Bhava (the descendant), and Karm Bhava (mid-heaven). Dhan, Putr, Randhr, and Labh Bhava are Panapharas (or succedents), while Sahaj, Ari, Dharm, and Vyaya Bhava are called Apoklimas (or cadents). Putr and Dharm Bhava are known by the name Kon (or trine). Evil bhavas or Dusthan Bhavas are Ari, Randhr, and Vyaya Bhava. Chaturasras are Bandhu and Randhr Bhava. Sahaj, Ari, Karm, and Labh Bhava are Upachaya Bhavas. 

37-38. Names of Bhavas: Thanu, Dhan, Sahaj, Bandhu, Putr, Ari, Yuvati, Randhr, Dharm, Karma, Labh, and Vyaya are in order the names of bhavas. I explained these briefly and leave it to you to grasp more according to your intelligence. As delivered by Lord Brahma, some further information is added thus (i.e. in the following verses.). 

39-43. Indications from Bhavas: Dharm Bhava and the 9th from Surya deal with one's father. Whatever effects are to be known from the Karm and Labh Bhava be also known from similar bhavas counted from Surya. Whatever results are to be known from Bandhu, Tanu, Dhan, Labh, and Dharm should also be known from the 4th of Chandr, from Kark rashi itself, and from the 2nd, 11th, and 9th from Chandr respectively. Whatever has to be known through Sahaj Bhava be also analyzed through the 3rd from Mangal. The 6th from Buddh be also considered in regard to indications derivable from Ari Bhava. The 5th from Guru, the 7th from Shukr, and both the 8th and 12th from Shani stand for consideration respectively in respect of offspring, spouse, and death. The lord of the bhava is equally important when estimating the indications of a particular bhava. 


Chapter 8
Drishtis of the Rashis 

1-3. Rashi Drishtis: O Maitreya, now detailed are the drishtis emanating from the rashi Mesh, etc.. Every movable rashi drishtis the 3 fixed rashis leaving the fixed rashi adjacent to it. Every fixed rashi gives drishti to the 3 movable rashis barring the adjacent movable rashi. And a common rashi gives a drishti to the other three common rashis. The grah in a rashi gives the same drishti as the rashi (in which the grah is) does. 

4-5. Dristhis of the Grahas: A grah in a movable rashi gives a drishti to the other 3 fixed rashis leaving the fixed rashi next to it. A grah in a fixed rashi does not give a drishti to the next movable rashi, but the remaining 3 movable rashis. The one in a common rashi gives a drishti to the remaining 3 common rashis. Simultaneously, a grah in the rashi that receives a drishti is also subjected to the drishti concerned. 

6-9. Diagram of Dristhis: As depicted by Lord Brahma, I now narrate the diagram of drishtis, so that drishtis are easily understood by a mere sight of the diagram. Draw a square or a circle marking the 8 directions (4 corners and 4 quarters thereof). Mark the zodiacal rashis as under: Mesh and Vrishabh in east; Mithun in the north-east; Kark and Simh in the north; Kanya in the north-west; Tula and Vrischik in the west; Dhanu in the south-west; Makar and Kumbh in the south; and Meen in the south-east. [addition Santhanam till chapter 9]: The drishtis (as per the earlier slokas) can be shown in a square diagram or cicular diagram (as per convenience). 


Chapter 9
Evils at Birth 

1. O Brahmin, first of all, estimate the evils and checking factors thereof through Lagn and then declare the effects of the 12 bhavas. 

2. Evils causing premature end exist up to the 24th year of one's age, As such, no definite calculation of life span should be made till such year of age. 

3-6. Short-life Combinations: (up to sloka 23): Should Chandr be in Ari, Randhr, or Vyaya Bhava and receives a drishti from a malefic; the child will die soon. If in the process there be a drishti from a benefic, it may live up to 8. If a benefic is retrograde in Ari, Randhr, or Vyaya Bhava receiving a drishti from a malefic, death will occur within a month of birth. This is true only when Lagn is not occupied by a benefic. Should Putr Bhava be occupied by Shani, Mangal, and Surya jointly (early) death of mother and brother will come to pass. Mangal placed in Tanu, or in Randhr Bhava and be yuti with Shani or Surya or receiving a drishti from a malefic, being bereft of a drishti from a benefic will prove a source of (immediate) death. 

7-11. If Shani and Mangal give a drishti to Lagn as the luminaries are yuti with Rahu (elsewhere), the child will live a fortnight. Immediate death of the child along with its mother will occur if Shani is in Karm Bhava, Chandr in Ari Bhava, and Mangal in Yuvati Bhava. One will immediately go to the abode of Yama if Shani is in Tanu Bhava, while Chandr and Guru are in their order in Randhr and Sahaj Bhava. Only a month will be the span of ones life who had Surya in Dharm Bhava, Mangal in Yuvati Bhava, and Guru and Shukr in Labh Bhava. All Grahas (any Grah) in Vyaya Bhava will be the source of a short life, specifically the luminaries, Shukr, and Rahu. But the drishti of these four grahas (on Vyaya Bhava) will counteract such evils. 

12. Chandr is capable of causing early end if she is with a malefic in Yuvati, Randhr, or Tanu Bhava and unrelated to a benefic. 

13. Early death will come to pass if there be a birth in the morning or evening junctions or in a Hora ruled by Chandr or in Gandanta, while Chandr and malefics occupy Kendras from Lagn. 

14. Definition of Sandhya: 3 Ghatis before the sight of the semi disc (half) of the rising Surya and a similar duration following Surya's set are called as morning twilight and evening twilight, respectively. 

15. Early Death: Should all the malefics be in the oriental half, while benefics are in the occidental half, early death of one born in Vrischik will follow. In this case there is no need of any rethinking. 

16. Malefic in Vyaya and Ari Bhava, or in Randhr and Dhan Bhava, while Lagn is hemmed between other malefics will bring early death. 

17. Malefics occupying Tanu and Yuvati Bhava, while Chandr is yuti with a malefic with no relief from a benefic will also cause premature death. 

18. Early death will be inflicted on the native if decreasing Chandr is in Tanu Bhava, while malefics capture Randhr Bhava and a Kendra. There is no doubt about that. 

19. Chandr in Tanu, Randhr, Vyaya, or Yuvati Bhava, and hemmed between malefics, will confer premature death. 

20. Should Chandr be in Tanu Bhava hemmed between malefics, while Yuvati or Randhr Bhava has a malefic in it, he will face immediate death along with his mother. 

21. Should Shani, Surya, and Mangal be in Vyaya, Dharm, and Randhr Bhava without drishti from a benefic, the child will face instant death. 

22. With a malefic in Yuvati Bhava or in the rising Dreshkan, while decreasing Chandr is in Tanu Bhava death be experienced early. 

23. The life span of the child will be either 2 months or 6 months only, if all grahas devoid of strength are relegated to Apoklima bhavas (i.e. Sahaj, Ari, Dharm, and Vyaya Bhava). 

24. Evils to Mother: (up to sloka 33): The mother of the native will incur evils (will die soon) if Chandr at birth receives a drishti from three malefics. Benefics giving a drishti to Chandr will bring good to the mother. 

25. Should Dhan Bhava be occupied by Rahu, Buddh, Shukr, Surya, and Shani, the child's birth has been after its father's death, while even the mother will face early death. 

26. If Chandr is in the 7th or the 8th from a malefic, be herself with a malefic, and receives a drishti from a strong malefic, predict mothers end to be early. 

27. The child will not live on mother's milk, but on that of she-goat if Surya is exalted or debilitated in Yuvati Bhava. 

28. Should a malefic be in the 4th, identical with an inimical rashi, counted from Chandr, while there is no benefic in a Kendra, the child will lose its mother in a premature manner. 

29. Malefics in Ari and Vyaya Bhava will bring evils to mother. The child's father will receive similar effects if Bandhu and Karm Bhava are captured by malefics. 

30. Buddh in Dhan Bhava, while malefics occupy Tanu and Vyaya Bhava: this yoga will destroy the entire family. 

31. Guru, Shani, and Rahu respectively posited in Tanu, Dhan, and Sahaj Bhava, will cause mother's death early. 

32. Doubtlessly the mother will give up the child if it has malefics in Konas counted from the decreasing Chandr. No benefic shall be yuti with the said malefics. 

33. If Mangal and Shani are together in a Kendra with reference to Chandr and occupy one and the same Navamsh the child will have two mothers. Yet it will be short-lived. 

34. Evil to Father: (up to sloka 42) One's father will incur early death if Shani, Mangal, and Chandr in their orders are in Tanu, Yuati and Ari Bhava. 

35. The native will at the time of his marriage lose his father if Guru is in Tanu Bhava, while Shani, Surya, Mangal and Buddh are together in Dhan Bhava. 

36. Early loss of father will take place if Surya is with a malefic or is hemmed between malefics as there is another malefic in the 7th from Surya. 

37. Remote will be the possibility of one's father sustaining if Surya is in Yuvati, while Mangal is in Karm and Rahu is in Vyaya Bhava. 

38. Early and troubled will be one's father's death if Mangal is in Karm Bhava identical with his enemy's rashi. 

39. Chandr in Ari Bhava, Shani in Tanu Bhava, and Mangal in Yuvati Bhava: this array of heavenly bodies at birth will not ensure a long span of life for the father. 

40. If Surya receives a drishti from Shani and be in Mesh or in Vrischik Navamsh, the father would have given up the family before birth of the child or would have passed away. 

41. If Bandhu, Karm, and Vyaya Bhava are all occupied by malefics, both the parents will leave the child to its own fate and wander from place to place. 

42. The father will not see the native till his (the native's) 23rd year if Rahu and Guru are together in an inimical rashi identical with Tanu or Bandhu Bhava. 

43-45. Parents: Surya is the indicator of father for all beings, while the mother is indicated by Chandr. Should Surya receive a drishti from one or more malefics or be hemmed between them, this will cause evils to father. Similarly, Chandr be considered in respect of mother. Malefics in the 6th, the 8th, or the 4th from Surya will bring inauspicious results about the father. Malefics in such places from Chandr will be adverse for the mother. The strength or otherwise of the occupants concerned be suitably estimated. 


Chapter 10
Antidotes for Evils 

1. Those are the evils (due to a native). I now narrate the antidotes for such evils as well, which will be helpful to assess the extent of inauspiciousness. 

2. Should one among Buddh, Guru, and Shukr be in an angle from Lagn, all evils are destroyed as Surya eliminates darkness.

3. Just as a single reverential obeisance before Lord Shiva, the Trident holder, frees one from all sins, a single but strong Guru in Lagn will ward off all the evils.

4. Lagn lord is singly capable of counteracting all evils if he is strongly placed in an angle just as Lord Shiva, the holder of the Bow, destroyed the three cities built of gold, silver, and iron for the demons by Maya.

5. All evils are destroyed if a benefic drishties Lagn of one born during the night in the bright half. Similarly, a malefic's drishti on Lagn of one born during day time in the dark half.

6. Surya in Vyaya will confer a hundred-year life span on one born in Tul Lagn.

7. It will prove auspicious for the mother as well as the native if Mangal joins or is drishtied by Guru.

8. If malefics are surrounded by benefics while angles or trines are themselves benefic-occupied evils disappear soon. Not only this, evils will not follow from the bhavas concerned.


Chapter 11
Judgement of Bhavas

1. O Maharishi Parashar, I have come to know of the evils and antidotes thereof as well from you. Please tell me, what is to be deduced from each bhava.

2. Indications of Tanu Bhava: Maharishi Parashar replies: physique, appearance, intellect (or the organ of intelligence, i.e. brain), complexion of the body, vigour, weakness, happiness, grief, and innate nature are all to be guessed through the ascending rashi.

3. Indications of Dhan Bhava: Wealth, grains (food etc.), family, death, enemies, metals, precious stones etc. are to be understood through Dhan Bhava.

4. Indications of Sahaj Bhava: From Sahaj Bhava, know of the following: valour, servants (attending, etc.), brothers, sisters, etc. initiatory instructions (Upadesh), journey, and parent's death.

5. Indications of Bandhu Bhava: Conveyances, relatives, mother, happiness, treasure, lands and buildings are to be consulted through Bandhu Bhava.

6. Indications of Putr Bhava: The learned should deduce from Putr Bhava: amulets, sacred spells, learning, knowledge, sons, royalty (or authority), fall of position, etc.

7. Indications of Ari Bhava: Maternal uncle, doubts about death, enemies, ulcers, step-mother, etc., are to be estimated from Ari Bhava.

8. Indications of Yuvati Bhava: Wife, travel, trade, loss of sight, death, etc., be known from Yuvati Bhava.

9. Indications of Randhr Bhava: Randhr Bhava indicates longevity, battle, enemies, forts, wealth of the dead, and things that have happened and are to happen (in the past and future births).

10. Indications of Dharm Bhava: Fortunes, wife's brother, religion, brother's wife, visits to shrines, etc., be known from Dharm Bhava.

11. Indications of Karm Bhava: Royalty (authority), place, profession (livelihood), honour, father, living in foreign lands and debts are to be understood from Karm Bhava.

12. Indications of Labh Bhava: All articles, son's wife, income, prosperity, quadrupeds, etc., are to be understood from Labh Bhava.

13. Indications of Vyaya Bhava: From Vyaya Bhava, one can know about expenses, history of enemies, one's own death, etc.

14-16. Prosperity or Annihilation of a Bhava: Predict prosperity of the bhava which is yuti with or drishtied by a benefic. Also, when its lord is in Yuvavastha or Prabuddhavastha or in Kismaravastha or in Karm Bhava, the bhavas well-being is indicated. The bhava which is not drishtied by its lord or whose lord is with a malefic grah or with one of the lords of evil and such other bhavas (i.e. 3rd, 6th, 8th, 11th, and 12th) or is defeated in a war between grahas or is in one of the three Avasthas, viz, Vriddhavastha, Mritavastht, and Suptavastha.


Chapter 12
Effects of Tanu Bhava

1-2. Physical comforts: Should Lagn lord be yuti with a malefic or be in Randhr, 6th, or 12th, physical felicity will diminish. If he is in an angle or trine there will be at all times comforts of the body. If Lagn lord is in debilitation, combustion, or enemy's rashi, there will be diseases. With a benefic in an angle or trine, all diseases will disappear. Lagn's angles (i.e. Bandhu, Yuvati, or the lOth) or its trine (Putr, Dharm) containing a benefic is a powerful remedy for all related to health.

3. There will not be bodily health if Lagn or Chandr be drishtied by or yuti with a malefic, being devoid of a benefics drishti.

4. Bodily Beauty: A benefic in Lagn will give a pleasing appearance, while a malefic will make one bereft of good appearance. Felicity of the body will be enjoyed if Lagn is drishtied by or yuti with a benefic.

5-7. Other Benefits: If Lagn lord, Buddh, Guru, or Shukr be in an angle or in a trine, the native will be long lived, wealthy, intelligent, and liked by the king. Fame, wealth, abundant pleasures, and comforts of the body will be acquired if Lagn lord is in a movable rashi and be drishtied by a benefic grah. One will be endowed with royal marks (of fortune) if Buddh, Guru, or Shukr be in Lagn along with the Chandr, or be in angle from Lagn. If Buddh, Guru, or Shukr be in 4th, 7th, or 10th from Lagn, or be in the company of Chandr in Lagn, the native will enjoy royal fortunes.

8. Coiled Birth: If there be a birth in one of Mesh, Vrishabh, and Simh Lagnas containing either Shani or Mangal, the birth of the child is with a coil around a limb. The corresponding limb will be in accordance with the Rashi or Navamsh rising. (The limbs indicated by the Rashis are shown in sloka 4-4 1/2 of ch. 4 )

9. Birth of Twins: The native, who has Surya in a quadruped rashi while others are in dual rashis with strength, is born as one of the twins (Quadruped rashis are: Mesh, Vrishabh, Simh, first half of Makar, and second part of Dhanu).

10. To Be Nurtured by Three Mothers: If Surya and Chandr join in one and the same bhava and fall in one Navamsh, the native will be nurtured by three different mothers for the first three months from its birth and will later on be brought up by its father and brother. ('Bhratri' apart from meaning a brother calls for interpretation as a near relative in general).

11. Important: The learned in Jyotish should base the effects on Chandr also as are applicable to Lagn. Now explained are clues to know of ulcers, identity marks, etc., on one's person.

12-14. Decanates and Bodily Limbs: Head, eyes, ears, nose, temple, chin, and face is the order of limbs denoted (by the various bhavas) when the first decanate of a rashi ascends. In the case of the second decanate ascending, the order is: neck, shoulder, arm, side, heart, stomach, and navel. The order for the third decanate ascending is: pelvis, anus/penis, testicles, thigh, knee, calf, and foot. The portion already risen indicates left side of the body (while the one yet to rise, i.e. the invisible half, denotes the right side of the body).

15. Limbs Affected: The limb related to a malefic by occupation will have ulcers or scars while the one related to a benefic will have a mark (like moles etc). So say the Jyotishis. (Also see sloka 6, ch. 4 of Saravali, which states that a malefic or a benefic if be in own Rashi or Navamsh, the effects will be right from birth. In other cases, it will be in the course of one's life that these effects will come to pass.)


Chapter 13
Effects of Dhan Bhava

1-2. Combinations for Wealth: O excellent of the Brahmins, listen to me speaking on the effects of Dhan Bhava. If the lord of Dhan is in Dhan or is in an angle or in trine he will promote one's wealth (or monetary state). Should he be in Ari/8th/12th, financial conditions will decline. A benefic in Dhan will give wealth while a malefic instead will destroy wealth.

3. One will be wealthy if Guru is in Dhan as the lord of Dhan or is with Mangal.

4. If Dhan lord is in Labh, while the lord of Labh in Dhan, wealth will be acquired by the native. Alternately, these two lords may join in an angle or in a trine.

5. If the lord of Dhan is in an angle while Labh lord is in a trine thereof or is drishtied by or yuti with by Guru and Shukr, the subject will be wealthy.

6-7. Yogas for Poverty: One will be penniless if the lord of Dhan Bhava is in an evil bhava while the lord of Labh Bhava is also so placed, and Dhan Bhava is occupied by a malefic. There will be penury right from birth and the native will have to beg even for his food if the lords of Dhan and Labh Bhava are both combust or with malefics.

8. Loss of Wealth through the King: Should the lords of Dhan and Labh Bhava be relegated to Ari, Randhr, or Vyaya Bhava (jointly or separately),while Mangal is in Labh Bhava and Rahu is in Dhan Bhava, the native will lose his wealth on account of royal punishments.

9. Expenses on Good Accounts: When Guru is in Labh, Shukr is in Dhan, and a benefic is placed in Vyaya Bhava, while Dhan's lord is yuti with a benefic, there will be expenses on religious or charitable grounds.

10. Fame, etc.: If Dhan's lord is in own rashi or is exalted the native will look after his people, will help others, and all will become famous.

11. Effortless Aquisition: If Dhan's lord is yuti with a benefic and is in a good division like Paravatamsh, there will be effortlessly all kinds of wealth in the native's family. ("Paravatamshdau" of the text denotes Paravat or such other higher vargas: Dhan's lord should be in Paravatamsh or in Devalokamsh, Brahmalokamsh, Sakravahanamsh, or Sridhamamsh in the Dash Varg scheme.)

12. Eyes: If Dhan lord is endowed with strength, the native will possess beautiful eyes. Should the said grah be in Ari, Randhr, or Vyaya Bhava, there will be disease or deformity of eyes.

13. Untruthful Person: If Dhan Bhava and its lord are yuti with malefics, the native will be a tale-bearer, will speak untruth and will be afflicted by windy diseases.


Chapter 14
Effects of Sahaj Bhava

1. O Brahmin, I now tell you about Sahaj Bhava. Should Sahaj Bhava be yuti with or drishtied by a benefic, the native will be endowed with co-born and be courageous.

2. If Sahaj's lord along with Mangal drishtis Sahaj Bhava the native will enjoy good results due to Sahaj Bhava. Alternatively, these two grahas may be in Sahaj itself.

3. Destruction at once of co-born will come to pass if the said 2 grahas are together with a malefic or in a rashi owned by a malefic.

4-4 1/2. Female and Male Co-born: If Sahaj's lord is a female grah or if Sahaj Bhava be occupied by female grahas, one will have sisters born after him. Similarly, male grahas and male rashis denote younger brothers. Should it be of mixed nature, co-born of both sexes will be obtained. These effects be declared after assessing the strength and weakness of the concerned.

5-6. Should Sahaj's lord and Mangal be together in Randhr Bhava, destruction of co-born will result. Happiness in this respect will come to pass if Mangal or Sahaj's lord is in an angle or in a trine or in exaltation, or friendly divisions.

7-11. Number of Brothers and Sisters: If Buddh is in Sahaj Bhava while Sahaj's lord and Chandr are together as the indicator (Mangal) joins Shani, the effects are: there occurred the birth of an elder sister and there will be younger brothers. Furthermore, the third brother will die. Should Mangal be yuti with Rahu, while Sahaj's lord is in his debilitation rashi, there will be loss of younger brothers, and/or sisters, while three elder brothers and/or sisters were attained by the native. If Sahaj's lord is in an angle while the significator (Mangal) is exalted in a trine and be yuti with Guru, 12 will be the number of total co-born. Out of these two elders and the 3rd, the 7th, the 9th, and the 12th of the younger co-born will be shortlived, while six of the said twelve will be longlived.

12-13. There will be 1 co-born if Vyaya's lord (some texts read as Labh's lord) joins Mangal and Guru, while Sahaj Bhava is occupied by Chandr. If Chandr is lonely placed in Sahaj Bhava with drishti on male grahas, there will be younger brothers, while the drishti of Shukr denotes younger sisters.

14. Adverse Grahas: Surya in Sahaj Bhava will destroy the preborn. The afterborn will be destroyed if Shani is found in Sahaj Bhava. In the same situation, Mangal will destroy both the preborn and later born.

15. After estimating the strength and weakness of such yogas, the effects related to brothers and sisters be announced.


Chapter 15
Effects of Bandhu Bhava

1. O excellent of the Brahmins: Thus, have been briefly told about the effects of Sahaj Bhava. Now listen to the results related to Bandhu Bhava.

2. Housing Comforts: One will have residential comforts in full degree if Bandhu is occupied by its lord or by Lagn's lord and be drishtied by a benefic.

3. Miscellaneous: Should Putr's lord be in his own bhava, or in own Navamsh or in exaltation, the native will be endowed with comforts related to lands, conveyances, houses, etc., and musical instruments.

4. Housing Comforts: If Karm's lord joins Bandhu's lord in an angle or in a trine, the native will acquire beautiful mansions.

5. Relatives: Should Buddh be in Lagn, while Bandhu's lord being a benefic is drishtied by another benefic, the native will be honoured by his relatives.

6. Long-living Mother: If Bandhu Bhava is occupied by a benefic, while its lord is in his exaltation rashi, as the indicator of mother is endowed with strength, the native with have a long-living mother.

7. Happiness of Mother: The native's mother will be happy if Bandhu's lord is in an angle while Shukr is also in an angle as Buddh is exalted.

8. Quadrupeds: Surya in Bandhu, Chandr and Shani in Dharm, and Mangal in Labh Bhava, this yoga will confer cows and buffaloes on the native.

9. Dumbness: Should Bandhu Bhava be a movable one, while its lord and Mangal are together in Ari or Randhr Bhava, the native will be dumb.

10-14. Conveyances: If Lagn's lord is a benefic while Bandhu's lord is in fall or in Labh Bhava and the significator (Shukr) is in Vyaya Bhava, the native will obtain conveyances in his 12th year. Should Surya be in Bandhu Bhava, as Bandhu's lord is exalted and be with Shukr, one will acquire conveyanees in his 32nd year. It will be in the 42nd year that one will be endowed with conveyances if Bandhu's lord joins Karm's lord in his (4th lord's) exaltation Navamsh. An exchange between Labh's and Bandhu's lords will confer conveyances in the 12th year. A benefic related to Bandhu Bhava (and to its lord) will bring with him auspicious effects (regarding conveyances) while a malefic will produce only malefic effects (in respect of conveyances). Should a benefic be in Bandhu, drishti Bandhu, or in yuti with the lord of Bandhu, or a drishti on the lord of Bandhu Bhava, then the native will be happy with conveyances and be free from accidents and dangers. A malefic replacing the said benefic will cause losses concerning vehicles and reduce one to severe accidents. 


Chapter 16
Effects of Putr Bhava

1-3. 0 Brahmin, now I tell you the effects related to Putr Bhava. If the lords of Lagn and Putr are in their own rashis or in an angle, or in a trine, one will enjoy thorough happiness through his children. Should Putr's lord be in Ari, Randhr, or Vyaya Bhava, there will be no offspring. Should the lord of Putr be combust or be with malefics and be weak, there will be no children; even if per chance issues are obtained, they will only quit the world soon. The yuti of Putr's lord with Lagn's lord in a good bhava will ensure early obtainment of children apart from happiness through them. If they join in an evil bhava, they will prove a defect in this respect.

4. If Putr's lord is in Ari Bhava as Lagn's lord is yuti with Mangal, the native will lose his very first child where after his female will not be fertile to yield an offspring.

5. Should Putr's lord be in fall in Ari, Randhr, or Vyaya Bhava, while Buddh and Ketu are in Putr Bhava, the native's wife will give birth to one child only.

6. If Putr's lord is in fall and be not in drishti to Putr, while Shani and Buddh are in Putr, the native's wife wil give birth to one child only.

7. Should Dharm's lord be in Lagn, while Putr's lord is in fall and Ketu is in Putr along with Buddh, obtainment of progeny will be after a great deal of ordeal.

8. If Putr's lord is in Ari, Randhr, or Vyaya Bhava, or be in an inimical rashi, or be in fall, or in Putr itself, the native will beget issues with difficulty.

9. Should Putr Bhava be owned by Shani or Buddh and be occupied or drishtied by Shani and Mandi, one will have adopted issues.

10. Should Surya and Chandr be together in a rashi and in the same Navamsh, the native will be brought up by three mothers or two fathers.

11. Adopted issue is indicated if Putr is tenanted by six grahas, while its lord is in Vyaya Bhava, and Chandr and Lagn are endowed with strength.

12. There will be many children if Putr's lord is strong while Putr is drishtied by strong Buddh, Guru, and Shukr.

13. If Putr's lord is with Chandr or is in her Decanate the native will beget daughters, so say Jyotishis.

14. If Putr's lord is in a movable rashi, while Shani is in Putr, as Rahu is with Chandr the child (so born) is of questionable birth.

15. Undoubtedly, the native is born of other's loins if Chandr is in the 8th from Lagn, while Guru is in the 8th from Chandr. Malefic's drishti or yuti is essential in this Yog.

16. If Putr's lord is exalted or be in Dhan, Putr, or Dharm Bhava, or be yuti with or drishtied by Guru, obtainment of children will be there.

17. One will obtain children that will indulge in mean deeds if Putr is occupied by three or four malefics, while Putr's lord is in fall. A benefic (including Buddh) in Putr is excluded in the said combination.

18. If Putr is occupied by Guru, while its lord is with Shukr, one will obtain an offspring in his 32nd or 33rd year.

19. Should Putr's lord be in an angle along with Guru, the Karak, one will beget a child at the age of 30 or 36.

20. If Guru is in Dharm Bhava, while Shukr is in the 9th from Guru along with Lagn's lord, one will beget a child at the age of 40.

21. The native will at the age of 32 lose his child if Rahu is in Putr, Putr's lord is in yuti with a malefic, and Guru is in debilitation.

22. There will be loss of children at 33 and 36 if a malefic is in the 5th from Guru, while another is in the 5th from Lagn.

23. Should Mandi be in Lagn, while Lagn's lord is in fall, grief on account of loss of child at the age of 56 will come to pass.

24-32. Number of Children: There will be 10 sons if Bandhu Bhava and Ari Bhava are occupied by malefics while Putr's lord is in deep exaltation joining Lagn's lord as Guru is with another benefic. Nine will be the number of sons that one will beget if Guru is in deep exaltation as Rahu is with Dhan's lord, and Dharm is occupied by its own lord. There will be eight sons if Guru is in Putr, or Dharm Bhava, while Putr's lord is endowed with strength and Dhan's lord is in Karm Bhava. Shani in Dharm Bhava, while Putr's lord is in Putr itself, gives 7 sons out of which twins will be born twice. If Putr's lord is in Putr in yuti with Dhan's lord, there will be birth of 7 sons out of which 3 will pass away. Only one son is denoted if there be a malefic in Putr Bhava, while Guru is in the 5th from Shani or vice versa. If Putr Bhava has a malefic in it or if Shani is in the 5th from Guru the native will beget offspring only through his second or third wife. Should Putr be occupied by a malefic, while Guru is yuti with Shani in Putr Bhava, as Lagn's lord is in Dhan Bhava, and Putr's lord is yuti with Mangal, one will live long but lose his children one after the other as they are born.


Chapter 17
Effects of Ari Bhava

1. O Brahmin, following are the effects produced by Ari Bhava, relating to diseases, ulcers, etc.. Listen to this attentively.

2. Ulcers / Bruises: Should Ari's lord be in Ari itself, or in Lagn, or Randhr, there will be ulcers or bruises on the body. The rashi becoming Ari Bhava will lead to the knowledge of the concerned limb.

3-5. Relatives Affected: The Karak of a relative or the lord of such a bhava joining Ari's lord, or being in Ari, or Randhr Bhava, indicates ulcers/bruises to such a relative like father. Surya with such lordship and in such a bhava denotes such affectation of head, Chandr denotes such affection of the face, Mangal denotes such affection of the neck, Buddh denotes such affection of the navel, Guru denotes such affection of the nose, Shukr denotes such affection of the eyes, Shani denotes such affection of the feet, and the Rahu and Ketu denote such affection of the abdomen. The relatives signified by grahas and bhavas are denoted in ch. 32, infra. The second clue is to know the possible affliction, to the native, of a particular area in the body. If Surya is the lord of Ari Bhava, or is with Ari's lord, or is in Ari, or Randhr Bhava, the native will be apt to incur affliction of head, and so on and so forth. As regards, Rahu and Ketu, they do not own any bhava in the ormal context. Hence, their position in Ari or Randhr Bhava, or the situation that they are joining Ari's lord need only be considered. Rahu or Ketu in the Ari or Randhr Bhava will cause stomachial disorders.

6. Facial Diseases: Should Lagn's lord be in a rashi of Mangal or of Buddh, and has a drishti on Buddh, there will be diseases of the face.

7-8 1/2. Leprosy: Mangal or Buddh having ownership of the ascending rashi and joining Chandr, Rahu, and Shani, will cause leprosy. If Chandr is in Lagn, which is not however Cancer, and be with Rahu, there will occur white leprosy. Shani in place of Rahu will cause black leprosy, while Mangal similarly will afflict one with blood-leprosy.

9-12 1/2. Diseases in General: When Lagn is occupied by the lords of Ari and Randhr Bhava along with Surya, the native will be afflicted by fever and tumours. Mangal replacing Surya will cause swelling and hardening of the blood vessels and wounds and hits by weapons. Buddh so featuring will bring in billious diseases, while Guru in similar case will destroy any disease. Similarly, Shukr will cause diseases through females; Shani windy diseases; Rahu danger through low caste-men; and Ketu navel diseases. Chandr in yuti with the lords or Ari and Randhr Bhava will inflict dangers through water and phlegmatic disorders. Similar estimates be made from the respective significators and bhavas for relatives like father. (Replacing Lagn with a certain bhava, these afflictions to the concerned relatives be predicted). For example, if Ari's and Randhr's lords join Chandr in Sahaj Bhava, danger to co-born by drowning, lung disorders etc. be known. Should Shukr join Ari's and Randhr's lords in Labh Bhava, an elder brother of the native will incur venereal diseases.

13-19 1/2 TIMING OF ILLNESS: The native will be afflicted by illness throughout life if Shani is with Rahu while Ari lord and 6th Bhava are yuti with malefics. One will suffer from (severe) fever at the age of 6 and at the age of 12 if Mangal is in Ari while Ari lord is in Randhr. If the Chandr is in Dhanu/Meen while Guru is in Ari from Lagn, one will suffer from leprosy at the age of 19 and 22. If Rahu is in Ari, Lagna lord is in Randhr and Mandi is in an angle, consumption will trouble the native at the age of 26. Spleenary disorders will be experienced at the age of 29 and 30 if the lords of 6th and 12th are in exchange of their Rashis. Shani and Chandr together in Ari will infflct blood-leprosy at the age of 45. If Shani is with an inimical planet while Lagn lord is in Lagn itself windy disorders (like rheumatism) will trouble the native at the age of 59.

20-22. UNFORTUNATE YEARS: Should Chandr be yuti with Ari lord while the 8th lord is in Ari and the l2th lord is in Lagn, the native will be troubled by animals at the age of eight. O Brahmin, if Rahu is in Ari while Shani is in Randhr from the said Rahu, the child will have danger through fire at the age 1 and 2 while in Sahaj year birds will bring some evils.

23-25. UNFORTUNATE YEARS (continued): Danger through water will have to be feared during Putr and Dharm years if Surya is in Ari or Randhr while Chandr is in Vyaya from the said Surya. Shani in Randhr as Mangal is in Yuvati all cause small-pox, in Karm year and 30th year of age. If 8th lord joins Rahu in an angle/trine from Randhr Bhava and be in Randhr in Navamsa, the subject will be troubled by swelling of blood vessels, urinary disorders etc. during the 18th year and the 22nd year.

26. LOSS THROUGH ENEMIES: Loss of wealth will come to pass during the 31st year if Labh and 6th lords exchange their Rasis.

27. INIMICAL SONS: One's own sons will be his enemies if Putr lord is in Ari while Ari Lord is with Guru. Simultaneously Vyaya lord should be in Lagn..

28. FEAR FROM DOGS: There will be fear from dogs during the 10th and 19th year if the Lagna lord and the 6th lord are in exchange.


Chapter 18
Effects Of Yuvati Bhava

1. 0 excellent of the Brahmins, listen to me detailing the effects of the 7th Bhava. If Yuvati lord is in his own Rashi or in exaltation, one will derive full happiness through his wife (and marriage).

2. SICK WIFE: Should Yuvati lord be in Ari, 8th or Vyaya, the wife will be sickly. This, however, does not apply to own bhava or exaltation placement as above.

3. EXCESSIVE LIBIDINOUSNESS/DEATH OF WIFE: If Shukr is in Yuvati, the native will be exceedingly libidinous. If Shukr yuti a malefic in any bhava will cause loss of wife.

4-5. THE 7TH LORD: Should Yuvati lord be endowed with strength and be yuti with or be drishticd by a benefic, the native will be wealthy, honourable, happy and fortunate. Conversely, if Yuvati lord is in fall or is combust or is in an Enemy's Rashi, one will acquire sick wives and many wives.

6. PLURALITY OF WIVES: If Yuvati lord is in a Rashi of Shani or of Shukr and be drishtied by a benefic, there will be many wives. Should Yuvati lord be particularly in exaltation, the same effects will come to pass (there will be many wives).

7-8 1/2. MlSCELLANEOUS MATTERS: The native will befriend barren females (for sexual union) if Surya is in Yuvati. Chandr therein will cause association with such female as corresponding to the Rashi becoming Yuvati. Mangal placed in Yuvati will denotes association with marriageable girls (of those with menses) or with barren females. Buddh indicates harlots, mean females and females belonging to traders's community. Wife of a Brahmin or a pregnant female will be in the native's association if Guru is in Yuvati. Base females and females having attained their courses are denoted by Shani, Rahu/Ketu in Yuvati.

8-9 1/2. Mangal denotes a female with attractive breasts. Shani indicates sick and weak spouse. Guru will bring a spouse with hard and prominent breasts. Shukr will bring one with bulky and excellent breasts.

10-13 1/2. Malefics in Vyaya and 7th while decreasing Chandr is in Putr denote that the native will be controlled by spouse who will be inimical to the race (or family). If Yuvati Bhava is occupied or owned by Shani/Mangal, the native will beget a harlot as his spouse or he will be attached to other illegally. Should Shukr be in a Navamsa of Mangal or in a Rasi of Mangal or receive a drishti from or be yuti with Mangal, the native will "kiss" the private parts of the female. If Shukr is so related to Shani, the native will "kiss" the private parts of the male.

14-15. WORTHY SPOUSE: The native will beget a spouse endowed with (the seven principal) virtues who will expand his dynasty by sons and grandsons if the 7th lord is exalted while Yuvati is occupied by strong Lagna lord and a benefic.

16. EVILS TO SPOUSE: If Yuvati Bhava or its lord is yuti with a malefic the native's wife will incur evils, especially if Yuvati Bhava or its lord is bereft of strength.

17. LOSS OF SPOUSE: If Yuvati lord is devoid of strength and is relegated to Ari, 8th or Vyaya, or if Yuvati lord is in fall, the native's wife will be destroyed (i.e. she will die early).

18. LACK OF CONJUGAL FELICITY: If Chandr is in Yuvati as Yuvati lord is in Vyaya and the Karaka (indicator Shukr) is bereft of strength, the native will not be endowed with marital happiness.

19-21. PLURALlIY OF WIVES: One will have two wives if Yuvati lord is in fall, or in a malefic Rashi along with a malefic while Yuvati Bhava or the 7th Navamsa belong to a eunuch planet. If Mangal and Shukr are in Yuvati or if Shani is Yuvati while the lord of Lagn is in Randhr, the native will have 3 wives. There will be many wives if Shukr is in a dual Rashi while its lord is in exaltation as Yuvati lord is endowed with strength.

22. TIME OF MARRIAGE (upto sloka 34): If Yuvati lord is in a benefic's Bhava (or in Dharm as subha Rashi so means) while Shukr is exalted or is in own Rashi, the native will marry at the age of 5 or 9.

23. If Surya is in Yuvati while his dispositor is yuti with Shukr, there will be marriage at 7th or 11th year of age.

24. Shukr in Dhan while Yuvati lord is in Labh will give marriage at the age of 10 or 16.

25. Marriage will take place during the 11th year if Shukr is in an angle from Lagn while Lagn lord is in Makar or Kumbh.

26. The native will marry at 12 or l9 if Shukr is in an angle from the Lagna while Shani is in Yuvati counted from Shukr.

27. Should Shukr be in Yuvati from Chandr while Shani is in Yuvati from Shukr, marriage will be in the 18th year.

28. Marriage will be in the 15th year if Dhan lord is in Labh while Lagn lord is in Karm.

29. An exchange between the lords of Dhan and Labh will bring marriage 13 years after birth.

30. Ones 22nd/27th year will confer marriage if Shukr is in Yuvati from the 8th Bhava (i.e. Dhan from Lagna), while his dispositor is yuti with Mangal.

31. Should Yuvati lord be in Vyaya while the natal lord is in Yuvati in Navamsa, marriage will be in 23rd/26th year of age.

32. Either the 25th year or the 33rd year will bring marriage if Randhr lord is in Yuvati as Shukr is in Navamsa Lagna.

33. Should Shukr be in Dharm from Dharm (i.e. in Putr Bhava), while Rahu is in one of the said bhavas (i.e. in Putr/Dharm), marriage will take place during 31st or 33rd year.

34. The native will marry at 30 or 27 if Shukr is in Lagn while the 7th lord is in Yuvati itself.

35-39. TIMING OF WIFE'S DEATH: Loss of wife will occur in the 18th year or 33rd year of age of the native if Yuvati lord is in fall while Shukr is in Randhr. One will lose his spouse in his 19th year if Yuvati lord is in the 8th while Vyaya lord is in Yuvati. The native's wife will die within three days of marriage due to snake bite if the native has Rahu in Dhan and Mangal in Yuvati. If Shukr is in Randhr while his dispositor is in a Rashi of Shani, death of wife will take place during the native's 12th or 21st year of age. Should the ascendat lord be in his Rashi of debilitation as Dhan lord is in Randhr, loss of wife will occur in the 13th year of age.

40-41. THREE MARRIAGES: Should Chandr be in Yuvati from Shukr while Buddh is in Yuvati from Chandr and Randhr lord is in Putr (from the Lagna), there will be marriage in Karm year followed by another in the 22nd year and yet another in the 33rd year.

42. DEATH OF WlFE: lf Ari, 7th and 8th are in their order occupied by Mangal, Rahu and Shani, the native's wife will not live (long). 


Chapter 19
Effects of Randhr Bhava

1. Long Life: O excellent of the Brahmins, listen to me speak on the effects of Randhr Bhava. If Randhr's lord is in an angle, long life is indicated.

2. Short Life: Should Randhr's lord join Lagn's lord or a malefic and be in Randhr itself, the native will be short lived. 3. Shani and Karm's Lord about Longevity : Similarly, consider Shani and Karm's lord in the matter of longevity.

3. Karm's lord is in Randhr along with a malefic grah and/or Lagn's lord.

4-7. Long Life: There will be long life if Ari's lord is in Vyaya; or if Ari's lord is in Ari as Vyaya's lord is in Vyaya; or if Ari's lord and Vyaya's lord are in Lagn and Randhr. If the lords of Putr, Randhr, and Tanu Bhava are in own Navamshas, own Rashis or in friendly Rashis, the native will enjoy a long span of life. Should the lords of Lagn, Randhr, and Karm Bhava and Shani are all disposed severally in an angle, in a trine or in Labh Bhava, the subject will live long. Like these, there are many other yogas dealing with the issue of longevity. The strength and weakness of the grahas concerned be estimated in deciding longevity.

8-13. Short Life: One's span of life will be between 20 and 32 years if Lagn's lord is weak while Randhr's lord is an angle. The native will only be short-lived if Randhr's lord is in fall, while Randhr Bhava has a malefic in it and Tanu Bhava is bereft of strength. Death will be instant at birth if Randhr Bhava, Randhr's lord, and Vyaya Bhava are all conjunct malefics. Malefics in angles and/or trines and benefics in Ari and/or Randhr Bhava, while Tanu Bhava has in it Randhr's lord in fall: this yoga will cause immediate end. If Putr and Randhr Bhava and Randhr's lord are all conjunct malefics, the life span will be very brief. Within a month of birth, death will befall the child if Randhr's lord is in Randhr itself while Chandr is with malefics and be bereft of beneficial drishti.

14-15. Long Life (again): One will be long-lived if Lagn's lord is in exaltation, while Chandr and Guru are respectively in Labh and Randhr Bhava. If Lagn's lord is exceedingly strong and receives a drishti from a benefic which is placed in an angle, the person concerned will be wealthy, virtuous and long-lived.


Chapter 20
Effects Of Dharm Bhava

1-2. Combinations for Fortunes: O Brahmin, now listen to the effects of Dharm Bhava. One will be fortunate (or affluent) if Dharm's lord is in Dharm Bhava with strength. Should Guru be in Dharm Bhava while Dharm's lord is in an angle and Lagn's lord is endowed with strength, one will be extremely fortunate.

3. Fortunate (Affluent) Father: If Dharm's lord is with strength as Shukr is in Dharm, while Guru is in an angle from Tanu Bhava, the native's father is fortunate.

4. Indigent Father: If Dharm's lord is debilitated while the 2nd and/or the 4th from Dharm Bhava is occupied by Mangal, the native's father is poor.

5. Long-living Father: Should Dharm's lord be in deep exaltation while Shukr is in an angle from Tanu Bhava and Guru is in the 9th from Navamsh Lagn, the father of the native will enjoy a long span of life.

6. Royal Status for Father: If Dharm's lord is an angle and receives a drishti from Guru, the native's father will be a king endowed with conveyances or be equal to a king.

7. Wealthy and Famous Father: Should Dharm's lord be in Karm Bhava, while Karm's lord receives a drishti from a benefic the native's father will be very rich and famous.

8-9. Virtuous and Devoted to Father: Should Surya be in deep exaltation as Dharm's lord is in Labh Bhava, the native will be virtuous, dear to the king, and devoted to father. If Surya is in a trine from Lagna, while Dharm's lord is in Yuvati in yuti with or receiving a drishti from Guru, the native will be devoted to his father.

10. Fortunes, etc.: Acquisition of fortunes, conveyances, and fame will follow the 32nd year of age if Dharm's lord is in Dhan, while Dhan's lord is in Dharm.

11. Inimical to Father: There will be mutual enmity between the father and the native if Lagn's lord is in Dharm Bhava, but with the lord of Ari. Further, the native's father will be of contemptible disposition.

12. Begged Food: If Karm's lord and Sahaj's lord are bereft of strength, while Dharm's lord is in fall or combust the native will go begging for his food.

13-25. Combinations for Father's Death: The father of the native would have passed away prior to the native's birth if Surya is in Ari, Randhr, or Vyaya Bhava as Randhr's lord is in Dharm Bhava, Vyaya's lord is in Tanu Bhava, and Ari's lord is in Putr Bhava. Should Surya be in Randhr Bhava, while Randhr's lord is in Dharm, the native's father will pass away within a year of his birth. If the lord of Vyaya Bhava is in Dharm Bhava, while Dharm's lord is in its debilitation Navamsh, the native's father will face his end during the 3rd or the 16th year of the native. Death of father will occur in the 2nd or the 12th year, if Lagn's lord is in Randhr Bhava, as Randhr's lord is with Surya. Should Rahu be in the 8th from Dharm (i.e. Bandhu Bhava), as Surya is in the 9th from Dharm (i.e. Putr Bhava), death of father will take place in the 16th or the 18th year of the native. If Shani is in the 9th from Chandr, as Surya is with Rahu, the native's father will die in the 7th or the 19th year of the native. The native in his 44th year will lose his father if Dharm's lord is in Vyaya, as Vyaya's lord is in Dharm. If Lagn's lord is in Randhr Bhava as Chandr is in Surya's Navamsh, the native in his 35th or 41st year will lose his father. One will lose his father in the 50th year if Surya, being the lord of Dharm, is conjunct Mangal and Shani. If Surya is in the 7th from Dharm Bhava (i.e. Sahaj Bhava), as Rahu is in the 7th from Sahaj Bhava (i.e. Dharm Bhava), the 6th or 25th year of the native will be fatal for father. If Shani is in the 7th from Randhr Bhava (i.e. Dhan Bhava), as Surya is in the 7th from Shani (i.e. Randhr Bhava), the ages of 21, 26, or 30 will be fatal for the father. If Dharm's lord is in its debilitation rashi, while his dispositor is in Dharm Bhava, the native will lose his father at the age of 26 or 30. Thus, the Jyotishis may know the effects (of Dharm Bhava).

26. Fortunes: One will enjoy abundant fortunes if Shukr is in deep exaltation and be in the company of Dharm's lord, as Shani is in Sahaj.

27-28. Fortunate Periods: Abundant fortunes be acquired after the 20th year if Dharm has Guru in it, as its lord is in an angle from Lagn. Should Buddh be in his deep exaltation as Dharm's lord is in Dharm itself, abundant fortunes will be earned after the 36th year.

29. Should Lagn's lord be in Dharm as Dharm's lord is in Lagn, and Guru is in Yuvati, there will be gains of wealth and conveyances.

30. Lack of Fortunes: If Rahu is in the 9th from Dharm Bhava (i.e. Putr Bhava), as his dispositor is in Randhr Bhava, and Dharm's lord is in fall, the native be devoid of fortunes.

31. Food by Begging: Should Shani be in Dharm Bhava along with Chandr, as Lagn's lord is in fall, the native will acquire food by begging.

32. 0 Brahmin, these are the effects related to Dharm Bhava. I have explained (these) briefly. These may be (further, estimated with the help of the state of the lords of Lagn and Dharm Bhava and in other manners as well.


Chapter 21
Effects of Karm Bhava

1. I now explain the effects of Karm Bhava. Listen to these, O Maitreya, in the words of Brahma, Garga, and others.

2. Paternal Happiness: If Karm's lord is strong and in exaltation or in its own Rashi/Navamsh, the native will derive extreme paternal happiness, will enjoy fame, and will perform good deeds.

3. If Karm's lord is devoid of strength, the native will face obstructions in his work. If Rahu is in an angle or in a trine, he will perform religious sacrifices like Jyotishtoma.

4. If Karm's lord is with a benefic or be in an auspicious Bhava, one will always gain through royal patronage and in business. In a contrary situation, only opposite results will come to pass.

5. Should Karm and Labh Bhava be both occupied by malefics the native will indulge only in bad deeds and will defile his own men.

6. If the lord of Karm Bhava is relegated to Randhr Bhava along with Rahu, the native will hate others; be a great fool and will do bad deeds.

7. If Shani, Mangal, and Karm's lord are in Yuvati, as Yuvati's lord is with a malefic, the native will be fond of carnal pleasures and of filing his belly.

8-10 Should Karm's lord be in exaltation and be in the company of Guru as Dharm's lord is in Karm the native will be endowed with honour, wealth, and valour. One will lead a happy life if Labh's lord is in Karm and Karm's lord is in Lagn, or if the lord of Karm Bhava is yuti with the lord of Labh Bhava in an angle. Should Karm's lord in strength be in Meen along Guru, the native will doubtless obtain robes, ornaments, and happiness.

11. Should Rahu, Surya, Shani, and Mangal be in Labh Bhava, the native will incur cessation of his duties.

12. One will be learned and wealthy if Guru is in Meen along with Shukr, while Lagn's lord is strong and Chandr is in exaltation.

13. Should Karm's lord be in Labh, while Labh's lord is in Tanu Bhava and Shukr is in Karm, the native will be endowed with precious stones.

14. If the Karm's lord is exalted in an angle or a trine, and is yuti with Guru, or receives a drishti from Guru, one will be endowed with (worthy) deeds.

15. Should Karm's lord be in Lagn along with Lagn's lord as Chandr is in an angle or in a trine, the native will be interested in good deeds.

16. If Shani is in Karm Bhava along with a debilitated grah, while Karm Bhava in the Navamsh Kundali is occupied by a malefic, the native will be bereft of (virtuous) acts.

17. One will indulge in bad acts if Karm's lord is in Randhr Bhava, while Randhr's lord is in Karm Bhava with a malefic.

18. Obstructions to the native's acts will crop up if Karm's lord is in fall, as both Karm Bhava and the 10th from Karm Bhava (i.e. Yuvati Bhava) have malefic occupations. Similar effects will come to pass if Labh's lord is in Karm Bhava, while Karm's lord is strong and gives a drishti to Guru. Fame will come to the native if Karm's lord is in Dharm Bhava as Lagn's lord is in Karm Bhava, and Chandr is in Putr Bhava.

22. 0 excellent of the Brahmins, thus have been told about the effects of Karm Bhava in a brief manner. Other related effects be guessed by you based on the relationship of the lords of Lagn and of Karm Bhava.


Chapter 22
Effects Of Labh Bhava

1. O excellent of the Brahmins, I now explain effects relating to Labh Bhava, the auspiciousness of which bhava will make one happy at all times.

2. Should Labh's lord be in Labh itself or be in an angle or in a trine from Lagn, there will be many gains. Similarly, if Labh's lord is exalted, though in combustion there will be many gains.

3. If Labh's lord is in Dhan Bhava, while Dhan's lord is in an angle (from Lagn) along with Guru, the gains will be great.

4. If Labh's lord is in Sahaj Bhava, while Labh Bhava is occupied by a benefic, the native will gain 2000 Nishkas in his 36th year.

5. If Labh's lord is yuti with a benefic in an angle or in a trine (from Lagn), the native will acquire 500 Nishkas in his 40th year.

6. The native will own 6000 Nishkas if Labh Bhava is occupied by Guru, while Dhan Bhava and Dharm Bhava are respectively taken over by Chandr and Shukr by position.

7. Should Guru, Buddh, and Chandr be in the 11th from Labh (i.e. Dharm Bhava) the native will be endowed with wealth, grains, fortunes, diamonds, ornaments, etc..

8. One will gain 1000 Nishkas in his 33rd year if Labh's lord is in Lagn and Lagn's lord is in Labh Bhava.

9. If Labh's lord is in Dhan Bhava as Dhan's lord is in Labh Bhava, one will amass abundant fortunes after marriage.

10. If Labh's lord is in Sahaj Bhava, as Sahaj's lord is in Labh Bhava, one will gain wealth through co-borns and will be endowed with excellent ornaments.

11. There will be no gains in spite of numerous efforts if Labh's lord is in fall, in combustion, or be in Ari, Randhr, or Vyaya Bhava with a malefic.


Chapter 23
Effects Of Vyaya Bhava

1-4. 0 Brahmin, now I tell you about the effects of Vyaya Bhava. There will be expenses on good accounts if Vyaya's lord is with a benefic, or in his own Bhava, or exalted, or if a benefic occupies Vyaya. One will own beautiful houses and beds and be endowed with superior scented articles and pleasures if Chandr happens to be Vyaya's lord and be exalted, or be in its own Rashi and/or Navamsh or in Labh/Dharm/Putr Bhava in Rashi/Navamsh. The said native will live with rich clothes, and ornaments, be learned and lordly.

5-6. And if Vyaya's lord is in Ari, or Randhr Bhava, or be in enemy's Navamsh, in debilitation Navamsh, or in Randhr Bhava in Navamsh, one will be devoid of happiness from wife, be troubled by expenses and deprived of general happiness. If he be in an angle or trine, the native will beget a spouse.

7. Just as these effects are derived from Tanu Bhava in regard to the native, similar deductions be made about co-borns, etc., from Sahaj and other bhavas.

8. Grahas placed in the visible half of the zodiac will give explicit results while the ones in the invisible half will confer secret results.

9. If Rahu is in Vyaya along with Mangal, Shani, and Surya, the native will go to hell. Similar effect will occur if Vyaya's lord is with Surya.

10. If there is a benefic in Vyaya, while its lord is exalted or is yuti with or receives a drishti from a benefic, one will attain final emancipation.

11. One will wander from country to country if Vyaya's lord and Vyaya Bhava are with malefics and Vyaya's lord gives a drishti to or receives a drishti from malefics.

12. One will move in his own country if Vyaya's lord and Vyaya Bhava are with benefics and Vyaya's lord gives a drishti to or receives a drishti from benefics.

13. Earnings will be through sinful measures if Vyaya is occupied by Shani, or Mangal, etc., and is not receiving a drishti from a benefic.

14. If Lagn's lord is in Vyaya, while Vyaya's lord is in Lagn with Shukr, expenses will be on religious grounds.


Chapter 24
Effects of the Bhava Lords

1. Effects of Lagn's Lord in Various Bhavas (up to sloka 12): Should Lagn's lord be in Lagn itself, the native will be endowed with physical happiness (i.e. good health) and prowess. He will be intelligent, fickle-minded, will have two wives and will unite with other females.

2. If the Lagn's lord is in Dhan, he will be gainful, scholarly, happy, endowed with good qualities, be religious, honourable, and will have many wives.

3. If Lagn's lord is in Sahaj Bhava, the native will equal a lion in valour, be endowed with all kinds of wealth, be honorable, will have two wives, be intelligent, and happy.

4. If Lagn's lord is in Bandhu Bhava, the native will be endowed with paternal and maternal happiness, will have many brothers, be lustful, virtuous and charming.

5. If Lagn's lord is in Putr Bhava, the native will have mediocre progenic happiness, will lose his first child, be honourable, given to anger, and be dear to king.

6. If Lagn's lord is in Ari Bhava and related to a malefic the native will be devoid of physical happiness, and will be troubled by enemies if there is no benefic drishti.

7. If Lagn's lord is a malefic and is placed in Yuvati Bhava, the natives wife will not live (long). If the grah in question is a benefic, one will wander aimlessly, face penury and be dejected. He will alternatively become a king (if the said grah is strong).

8. If Lagn's lord is in Randhr Bhava, the native will be an accomplished scholar, be sickly, thievish, be given to much anger, be a gambler, and will join others' wives.

9. If Lagn's lord is in Dharm Bhava, the native will be fortunate, dear to people, be a devotee of Shri Vishnu, be skilful, eloquent in speech, and be endowed with wife, sons, and wealth.

10. If Lagn's lord is in Karm Bhava, the native will be endowed with paternal happiness, royal honour (or patronage), fame among men and will doubtlessly have self-earned wealth.

11. If Lagn's lord is in Labh Bhava, the native will always be endowed with gains, good qualities, fame, and many wives. If Lagn's lord is in Vyaya Bhava and is devoid of benefic drishti and / or yuti the native will be bereft of physical happiness, will spend unfruitfully and be given to much anger.

13. Effects of Dhan's Lord in Various Bhavas (up to sloka 24): If Dhan's lord is in Tanu Bhava, the native will be endowed with sons and wealth, be inimical to his family, lustful, hard-hearted, and will do others' jobs.

14. If Dhan's lord is in Dhan Bhava, the native will be wealthy, proud, will have two or more wives and be bereft of progeny.

15. If Dhan's lord is in Sahaj Bhava, the native will be valorous, wise, virtuous, lustful, and miserly; all these when related to a benefic. If related to a malefic, the native will be a heterodox.

16. If Dhan's lord is in Bandhu Bhava, the native will acquire all kinds of wealth. If Dhan's lord is exalted and is yuti with Guru one will be equal to a king.

17. If Dhan's lord is in Putr Bhava the native will be wealthy. Not only the native, but also his sons, will be intent on earning wealth.

18. If Dhan's lord is in Ari Bhava along with a benefic the native will gain wealth through his enemies; if Dhan's lord is yuti with a malefic, there will be loss through enemies apart from mutilation of shanks.

19. If Dhan's lord is in Yuvati Bhava, the native will be addicted to others' wives; and he will be a doctor. If a malefic is related to the said placement by yuti with Dhan's lord or by drishti, the native's wife will (also) be of questionable character.

20. If Dhan's lord is in Randhr Bhava, the native will be endowed with abundant land and wealth. But he will have limited marital felicity and be bereft of happiness from his elder brother.

21. If Dhan's lord is in Dharm Bhava, the native will be wealthy, diligent, skilful, sick during childhood, and will later on be happy (i.e. healthy), and will visit shrines, observing religious code, etc.

22. If Dhan's lord is in Karm Bhava, the native will be libidinous, honourable, and learned; he will have many wives and much wealth, but he will be bereft of filial happiness.

23. If Dhan's lord is in Labh Bhava, the native will have all kinds of wealth, be ever diligent, honourable, and famous.

24. If Dhan's lord is in Vyaya Bhava, the native will be adventurous, be devoid of wealth, and be interested in other's wealth, while his eldest child will not keep him happy.

25. Effects of Sahaj's Lord in Various Bhavas (up to sloka 36): If Sahaj's lord is in Tanu Bhava, the native will have self-made wealth, be disposed to worship, be valorous, and be intelligent, although devoid of learning.

26. If Sahaj's lord is in Dhan Bhava, the native will be corpulent, devoid of valour, will not make much efforts, be not happy, and will have an eye on others' wives and others' wealth.

27. If Sahaj's lord is in Sahaj Bhava, the native will be endowed with happiness through co-born and will have wealth and sons, be cheerful, and extremely happy.

28. If Sahaj's lord is in Bandhu Bhava, the native will be happy, wealthy and intelligent, but will acquire a wicked spouse.

29. If Sahaj's lord is in Putr Bhava, the native will have sons, and be virtuous. If in the process Sahaj's lord be yuti with or receives a drishti from a malefic, the native will have a formidable wife.

30. If Sahaj's lord is in Ari Bhava, the native will be inimical to his co-born, be affluent, will not be well-disposed to his maternal uncle and be dear to his maternal aunt. 
31. If Sahaj's lord is in Yuvati Bhava, the native will be interested in serving the king. He will not be happy during boyhood, but the end of his life he will be happy.

32. If Sahaj's lord is in Randhr Bhava, the native will be a thief, will derive his livelihood serving others, and will die at the gate of the royal palace.

33. If Sahaj's lord is in Dharm Bhava, the native will lack paternal bliss, will make fortunes through wife, and will enjoy progenic and other pleasures.

34. If Sahaj's lord is in Karm Bhava, the native will have all lands of happiness and self-made wealth, and be interested in nurturing wicked females.

35. If Sahaj's lord is in Labh Bhava, then native will always gain in trading, be intelligent although not literate, be adventurous, and will serve others.

36. If Sahaj's lord is in Vyaya, the native will spend on evil deeds, will have a wicked father and will be fortunate through a female (or wife).

37. Effects of Bandhu's Lord in Various Bhavas (up to sloka 48): If Bandhu's lord is in Tanu Bhava, the native will be endowed with learning, virtues, ornaments, lands, conveyances, and maternal happiness.

38. If Bandhu's lord is in Dhan Bhava, the native will enjoy pleasures, all kinds of wealth, family life and honour, and be adventurous. He will be cunning in disposition.

39. If Bandhu's lord is in Sahaj Bhava, the native will be valorous, will have servants, be liberal, virtuous and charitable, and will possess self-earned wealth. He will be free from diseases.

40. If Bandhu's lord is in Bandhu, the native will be a minister and will possess all kinds of wealth. He will be skilful, virtuous, honourable, learned, happy and be well disposed to his spouse.

41. If Bandhu's lord is in Putr Bhava, the native will be happy and be liked by all. He will be devoted to Shri Vishnu, be virtuous, honourable, and will have self-earned wealth.

42. If Bandhu's lord is in Ari Bhava, the native will be devoid of maternal happiness, be given to anger, be a thief and a conjurer (or magician), be independent in action and be indisposed.

43. If Bandhu's lord is in Yuvati Bhava, the native will be endowed with a high degree of education, will sacrifice his patrimony and be akin to the dumb in an assembly.

44. If Bandhu's lord is in Randhr Bhava, the native will be devoid of domestic and other comforts, will not enjoy much parental happiness and be equal to a neuter.

45. If Bandhu's lord is in Dharm Bhava, the native will be dear to one and all, be devoted to God, be virtuous, honourable, and endowed with every land of happiness.

46. If Bandhu's lord is in Karm Bhava, the native will enjoy royal honours, be an alchemist, be extremely pleased, will enjoy pleasures and will conquer his five senses.

47. If Bandhu's lord is in Labh Bhava, the native will have fear of secret disease; he will be liberal, virtuous, charitable, and helpful to others.

48. If Bandhu's lord is in Vyaya Bhava the native will be devoid of domestic and other comforts, will have vices and be foolish and indolent.

49. Effects of Putr's Lord in Various Bhavas (up to sloka 60): If Putr's lord is in Lagn, the native will be scholarly, be endowed with progenic happiness, be a miser, be crooked, and will steal others' wealth.

50. If Putr's lord is in Dhan Bhava, the native will have many sons and wealth, be a pater familiaris, be honourable, be attached to his spouse, and be famous in the world.

51. If Putr's lord is in Sahaj, the native will be attached to his co-born, be a tale bearer and a miser, and be always interested in his own work.

52. If Putr's lord is in Bandhu Bhava, the native will be happy, endowed with maternal happiness, wealth and intelligence, and be a king or a minister or a preceptor.

53. If Putr's lord is in Putr Bhava, the native will have progeny if related to a benefic; there will be no issues if malefic is related to Putr's lord placed in Putr Bhava. Putr's lord in Putr Bhava will, however, make one virtuous and dear to friends.

54. If Putr's lord is in Ari Bhava, the native will obtain such sons who will be equal to his enemies, or will lose them, or will acquire an adopted or purchased son.

55. If Putr's lord is in Yuvati Bhava, the native will be honourable, very religious, endowed with progenic happiness, and be helpful to others.

56. If Putr's lord is in Randhr Bhava, the native will not have much progenic happiness, be troubled by cough and pulmonary disorders, be given to anger and be devoid of happiness.

57. If Putr's lord is in Dharm Bhava, the native will be a prince or equal to him, will author treatises, be famous, and will shine in his race.

58. If Putr's lord is in Karm Bhava, the native will enjoy a Raj Yog and various pleasures, and be very famous.

59. If Putr's lord is in Labh Bhava, the native will be learned, dear to people, be an author of treatises, be very skilful, and be endowed with many sons and wealth.

60. If Putr's lord is in Vyaya Bhava, the native will be bereft of happiness from his own sons, will have an adopted or purchased son.

61. Effects of Ari's Lord in Various Bhavas (up to sloka 72): If Ari's lord is in Tanu Bhava, the native will be sickly, famous, inimical to his own men, rich, honourable, adventurous, and virtuous.

62. If Ari's lord is in Dhan Bhava, the native will be adventurous, famous among his people, will live in alien countries (or places), be happy, be a skilful speaker ,and be always interested in his own work.

63. If Ari's lord is in Sahaj Bhava, the native will be given to anger, be bereft of courage, inimical to all of his co-born, and will have disobedient servants.

64. If Ari's lord is in Bandhu Bhava, the native will be devoid maternal happiness, be intelligent, be a tale bearer, be jealous, evil-minded, and very rich.

65. If Ari's lord is in Putr Bhava, the native will have fluctuating finances. He will incur enmity with his sons and friends. He will be happy, selfish, and kind.

66. If Ari's lord is in Ari Bhava, the native will have enmity with the group of his kinsmen, but be friendly to others and will enjoy mediocre happiness in matters like wealth.

67. If Ari's lord is in Yuvati Bhava, the native will be deprived of happiness through wedlock. He will be famous, virtuous, honourable, adventurous, and wealthy.

68. If Ari's lord is in Randhr Bhava, the native will be sickly, inimical, will desire others' wealth, be interested in others' wives, and be impure (or degraded).

69. If Ari's lord is in Dharm Bhava, the native will trade in wood and stones ('Pashan' also means poison), and will have fluctuating professional fortunes.

70. If Ari's lord is in Karm Bhava, the native will be well known among his men, will not be respectfully disposed to his father and will be happy in foreign countries. He will be a gifted speaker.

71. If Ari's lord is in Labh Bhava, the native will gain wealth through his enemies, be virtuous, adventurous, and will be somewhat bereft of progenic happiness.

72. If Ari's lord is in Vyaya Bhava the native will always spend on vices, be hostile to learned people and will torture living beings.

73. Effects of Yuvati's Lord in Various Bhavas (up to sloka 84): If Yuvati's lord is in Tanu Bhava, the native will go to others' wives, be wicked, skilful, devoid of courage, and afflicted by windy diseases.

74. If Yuvati's lord is in Dhan Bhava, the native will ha many wives, will gain wealth through his wife and be procrastinating in nature.

75. If Yuvati's lord is in Sahaj Bhava, the native will face loss of children and sometimes, with great difficulty, there will exist a living son. There is also the possibility of birth of a daughter (who will sustain).

76. If Yuvati's lord is in Bandhu Bhava, the wife of the native will not be under his control. He will be fond of truth, intelligent, and religious. He will suffer from dental diseases.

77. If Yuvati's lord is in Putr Bhava, the native will be honourable, endowed with all (i.e. seven principal) virtues, always delighted, and endowed with all kinds of wealth.

78. If Yuvati's lord is in Ari Bhava, the native will beget a sickly wife and he will be inimical to her. He will be given to anger and will be devoid of happiness.

79. If Yuvati's lord is in Yuvati Bhava, the native will be endowed with happiness through wife, be courageous, skilful, and intelligent, but only afflicted by windy diseases.

80. If Yuvati's lord is in Randhr Bhava, the native will be deprived of marital happiness. His wife will be troubled by diseases, be devoid of good disposition and will not obey the native.

81. If Yuvati's lord is in Dharm Bhava, the native will have union with many women, be well-disposed to his own wife and will have many undertakings (or assignments).

82. If Yuvati's lord is in Karm Bhava, the native will beget a disobedient wife, will be religious and endowed with wealth, sons, etc.

83. If Yuvati's lord is in Labh Bhava, the native will gain wealth through his wife, be endowed with less happiness from sons, etc., and will have daughters.

84. If Yuvati's lord is in Vyaya Bhava, the native will incur penury, be a miser, and his livelihood will be related to clothes. His wife will be a spend thrift.

85. Effects of Randhr's Lord in Various Bhavas (up to sloka 96): If Randhr's lord is in Tanu Bhava. the native will be devoid of physical felicity and will suffer from wounds. He will be hostile to gods and brahmins (or religious people).

86. If Randhr's lord is in Dhan Bhava, the native will be devoid of bodily vigour, will enjoy a little wealth, and will not regain lost wealth.

87. If Randhr's lord is in Sahaj Bhava, the native will be devoid of fraternal happiness, be indolent, and devoid of servants and strength.

88. If Randhr's lord is in Bandhu Bhava, the child will be deprived of its mother. He will be devoid of a house, lands, and happiness and will doubtlessly betray his friends.

89. If Randhr's lord is in Putr Bhava, the native will be dull witted, will have limited number of children, be long-lived, and wealthy.

90. If Randhr's lord is in Ari Bhava, the native will win over his enemies, be afflicted by diseases and during childhood will incur danger through snakes and water.

91. If Randhr's lord is in Yuvati Bhava, the native will have two wives. If Randhr's lord is yuti with a malefic in Yuvati Bhava there will surely be downfall in his business (or livelihood).

92. If Randhr's lord is in Randhr Bhava, the native will be long-lived. If the said grah is weak being in Randhr Bhava, the longevity will be medium, while the native will be a thief, be blame worthy and will blame others as well.

93. If Randhr's lord is in Dharm Bhava, the native will betray his religion, be a heterodox, will beget a wicked wife, and will steal others' wealth.

94. If Randhr's lord is in Karm Bhava the native will be devoid of paternal bliss, be a tale-bearer and be bereft of livelihood. If there is a drishti in the process from a benefic, then these evils will not mature.

95. If Randhr's lord along with a malefic is in Labh Bhava, the native will be devoid of wealth and will be miserable in boyhood but happy later on. Should Randhr's lord be yuti with with a benefic and be in Labh Bhava, the native will be long-lived.

96. If Randhr's lord is in Vyaya Bhava, the native will spend on evil deeds and will incur a short life. More so, if there be additionally a malefic in the said bhava.

97. Effects of Dharm's Lord in Various Bhavas (up to sloka 103): If Dharm's lord is in Lagn, the native will be fortunate (or prosperous), will be honoured by the king, be virtuous, charming, learned, and honoured by the public.

98. If Dharm's lord is in Dhan Bhava,the native will be a scholar, be dear to all, wealthy, sensuous, and endowed with happiness from wife, sons, etc.

99. If Dharm's lord is in Sahaj Bhava, the native will be endowed with fraternal bliss, be wealthy, virtuous, and charming.

100. If Dharm's lord is in Bandhu Bhava, the native will enjoy houses, conveyances, and happiness, will have all kinds of wealth and be devoted to his mother.

101. If Dharm's lord is in Putr Bhava the native will be endowed with sons and prosperity, devoted to elders, bold, charitable, and learned.

102. If Dharm's lord is in Ari Bhava, the native will enjoy meagre prosperity, be devoid of happiness from maternal relatives, and be always troubled by enemies.

103. 0 Brahmin, If Dharm's lord is in Yuvati Bhava, the native beget happiness after marriage, be virtuous, and famous.

104. If Dharm's lord is in Randhr Bhava, the native will not be prosperous and will not enjoy happiness from his elder brother.

105. If Dharm's lord is in Dharm Bhava, the native will be endowed with abundant fortunes, virtues, and beauty, and will enjoy much happiness from co-born.

106. If Dharm's lord is in Karm Bhava, the native will be a king or equal to him or be a minister or an army chief, be virtuous and dear to all.

107. If Dharm's lord is in Labh Bhava, the native will enjoy financial gains day by day, be devoted to elders, virtuous, and meritorious in acts.

108. If Dharm's lord is in Vyaya Bhava, the native will incur loss of fortunes, will always spend on auspicious acts, and will become poor on account of entertaining guests.

109. Effects of Karm's Lord in Various Bhavas (up to sloka 120): If Karm's lord is in Tanu Bhava, the native will be scholarly, famous, be a poet, will incur diseases in boyhood, and be happy later on. His wealth will increase day by day.

110 If Karm's lord is in Dhan Bhava, the native will be wealthy, virtuous, honoured by the king, charitable, and will enjoy happiness from father and others.

111. If Karm's lord is in Sahaj Bhava, the native will enjoy happiness from brothers and servants, be valorous, virtuous, eloquent, and truthful.

112. If Karm's lord is in Bandhu Bhava, the native will be happy, be always interested in his mother's welfare, will lord over conveyances, lands and houses, be virtuous, and wealthy.

113. If Karm's lord is in Putr Bhava, the native will be endowed with all kinds of learning; he will be always delighted, and he will be wealthy and endowed with sons.

114. If Karm's lord is in Ari Bhava, the native will be bereft of paternal bliss. Although he may be skilful he will be bereft of wealth and be troubled by enemies.

115. If Karm's lord is in Yuvati Bhava, the native will be endowed with happiness through wife, be intelligent, virtuous, eloquent, truthful, and religious.

116. If Karm's lord is in Randhr Bhava, the native will be devoid of (good) acts, long-lived and intent on blaming others.

117. If Karm's lord is in Dharm Bhava, one born of royal scion will become a king whereas an ordinary native will be equal to a king. This placement will confer wealth and progenic happiness, etc.

118. If Karm's lord is in Karm Bhava, the native will be skilful in all jobs, be valorous, truthful, and devoted to elders.

119. If Karm's lord is in Labh Bhava, the native will be endowed with wealth, happiness, and sons. He will be virtuous, truthful, and always delighted.

120. If Karm's lord is in Vyaya Bhava, the native will spend through royal abodes (i.e. kings), will have fear from enemies, and will be worried in spite of being skilful.

121. Effects of Labh's Lord in Various Bhavas (up to sloka 132): If Labh's lord is in Tanu Bhava, the native will be genuine in disposition, be rich, happy, even-sighted, be a poet, be eloquent in speech, and be always endowed with gains.

122. If Labh's lord is in Dhan Bhava, the native will be endowed with all kinds of wealth and all kinds of accomplishments, charitable, religious, and always happy. 

123. If Labh's lord is in Sahaj Bhava, the native will be skilful in all jobs, wealthy, endowed with fraternal bliss, and may sometimes incur gout pains. 

124. If Labh's lord is in Bandhu Bhava, the native will gain from maternal relatives, will undertake visits to shrines and will possess happiness of house and lands. 

125. If Labh's lord is in Putr Bhava, the native will be happy, educated and virtuous. He will be religious and happy.

126. If Labh's lord is in Ari Bhava, the native will be afflicted by diseases, be cruel, living in foreign places and troubled by enemies.

127. If Labh's lord is in Yuvati Bhava, the native will always gain through his wife's relatives, be liberal, virtuous, sensuous, and will remain at the command of his spouse.

128. If Labh's lord is in Randhr Bhava, the native will incur reversals in his undertakings and will live long while his wife will predecease him.

129. If Labh's lord is in Dharm Bhava, the native will be fortunate, skilful, truthful, honoured by the king, and be affluent.

130. If Labh's lord is in Karm Bhava, the native will be honoured by the king, be virtuous, attached to his religion, intelligent, truthful, and will subdue his senses.

131. If Labh's lord is in Labh Bhava, the native will gain in all his undertakings while his learning and happiness will be on the increase day by day.

132. If Labh's lord is in Vyaya Bhava, the native will always depend on good deeds, be sensuous, will have many wives and will befriend barbarians (or foreigners in general).

133. Effects of Vyaya's Lord in Various Bhavas (up to sloka 144): If Vyaya's lord is in Tanu Bhava, the native will be a spend thrift, be weak in constitution, will suffer from phlegmatic disorders, and be devoid of wealth and learning.

134. If Vyaya's lord is in Dhan Bhava, the native will always spend on inauspicious deeds, be religious, will speak sweetly, and will be endowed with virtues and happiness.

135. If Vyaya's lord is in Sahaj Bhava, the native will be devoid of fraternal bliss, will hate others and will promote self-nourishment (i.e. be quite selfish).

136. If Vyaya's lord is in Bandhu Bhava, the native will be devoid of maternal happiness and will day by day accrue losses with respect to lands, conveyances, and houses.

137. If Vyaya's lord is in Putr Bhava, the native will be bereft of sons and learning. He will spend as well as visit shrines in order to beget a son.

138. If Vyaya's lord is in Ari Bhava, the native will incur enmity with his own men, be given to anger, be sinful, miserable, and will go to others' wives. If Vyaya's lord is in Yuvati Bhava, the native will incur expenditure on account of his wife, will not enjoy conjugal bliss, and will be bereft of learning and strength.

140. If Vyaya's lord is in Randhr Bhava, the native will always gain, will speak affably, will enjoy a medium span of life and be endowed with all good qualities.

141. If Vyaya's lord is in Dharm Bhava, the native will dishonour his elders, be inimical even to his friends and be always intent on achieving his own ends.

142. If Vyaya's lord is in Karm Bhava, the native will incur expenditure through royal persons and will enjoy only moderate paternal bliss.

143. If Vyaya lord is in Labh Bhava, the native will incur losses, be brought up by others, and will sometimes gain through others.

144. If Vyaya's lord is in Vyaya Bhava, the native will only face heavy expenditure, will-not have physical felicity, be irritable and spiteful.

145-148. Miscellaneous: O Brahmin, those are the effects of bhava lords which are to be deduced considering their strengths and weaknesses. In the case of a grah owning two bhavas, the results are to be deducted based on its two lordships (for the same placement). If contrary results are thus indicated, the results will be nullified, while results of varied nature will come to pass. The grah will yield full, half, or a quarter of the effects according to its strength being full, medium, and negligible respectively. Thus, I have told you about the effects due to bhava lords in various bhavas.


Chapter 25
Effects of Non-Luminous Grahas

1. Thus, I have explained the effects of the seven grahas, viz. Surya, Chandr, Mangal, Buddh, Guru, Shukr, Shani, Rahu, and Ketu. Now, I tell you about the effects of non-luminous grahas.

2. Effects of Dhum in Various Bhavas (up to sloka 13): If Dhum is in Lagn, the native will be valiant, endowed with beautiful eyes. stupefied in disposition, unkind, wicked and highly short-tempered.

3. If Dhum is in Dhan Bhava, the native will be sickly, wealthy, devoid of a limb, will incur humiliation at royal level, be dull witted and be a eunuch.

4. Dhum is in Sahaj Bhava, the native will be intelligent, very bold, delighted, eloquent, and be endowed with men and wealth.

5. If Dhum is in Bandhu Bhava, the native will be grieved on account of being given up by his female, but will be learned in all Shastras.

6. If Dhum is in Putr Bhava, the native will have limited progeny, be devoid of wealth, be great, will eat anything and be bereft of friends and Mantras.

7. If Dhum is in Ari Bhava, the native will be strong, will conquer his enemies, be very brilliant, famous and free from diseases.

8. If Dhum is in Yuvati Bhava, the native will be penniless, be ever sensuous, skilful in going to others' females, and be always devoid of brilliance.

9. If Dhum is in Randhr Bhava, the native will be bereft of courage, but be enthusiastic, be truthful, disagreeable, hardhearted, and selfish.

10. If Dhum is in Dharm Bhava, the native will be endowed sons and fortunes, be rich, honourable, kind, religious, and well disposed to his relatives.

11. If Dhum is in Karm Bhava, the native will be endowed with sons and fortunes, be delighted, intelligent, happy, and truthful.

12. If Dhum is in Labh Bhava, the native will be endowed with wealth, grains and gold, be beautiful, will have knowledge of arts, be modest, and be skilful in singing.

13. If Dhum is in Vyaya Bhava, the native will be morally fallen, will indulge in sinful acts, be interested in others' wives, addicted to vices, unkind, and crafty.

14. Effects of Vyatipat in Various Bhavas (up to sloka 25): If Vyatipat (also known in short as Pat) is in Tanu Bhava, the native will be troubled by miseries,be cruel, will indulge in destructive acts, be foolish, and will be disposed to his relatives.

15. If Vyatipat is in Dhan Bhava, the native will be morally crooked, be bilious, will enjoy pleasures, be unkind, but grateful, be wicked, and sinful.

16. If Vyatipat is in Sahaj Bhava, the native will be firm in disposition, be a warrior, be liberal, very rich, dear to the king, and be head of an army.

17. If Vyatipat is in Bandhu Bhava, the native will be endowed with relatives, etc., but not sons and fortunes.

18. If Vyatipat is in Putr Bhava, the native will be poor, be charming in appearance, will have imbalances of phlegm, bile, and wind, be hard-hearted, and shameless.

19. If Vyatipat is in Ari Bhava, the native will destroy his, enemies, be physically mighty, skilful in use of all kinds of weapons and in arts, and be peaceful in disposition.

20. If Vyatipat is in Yuvati Bhava, the native will be bereft of wealth, wife and sons, will subdue to females, be miserable, sensuous, shameless, and friendly to others.

21. If Vyatipat is in Randhr Bhava, the native will have deformity of eyes, be ugly, unfortunate, spiteful to Brahmins, and be troubled by disorders of blood.

22. If Vyatipat is in Dharm Bhava, the native will have many kinds of business and many friends; he will be very learned, well disposed to his wife, and he will be eloquent.

23. If Vyatipat is in Karm Bhava, the native will be religious, peaceful, skilful in religious acts, very learned, and far-sighted.

24. If Vyatipat is in Labh Bhava, the native will be extremely opulent, be honourable, truthful, firm in policy, endowed with many horses and be interested in singing.

25. If Vyatipat is in Vyaya Bhava, the native will be given to anger, associated with many activities, disabled, irreligious and hate his own relatives.

26. Effects of Paridhi (or Parivesh) in Various Bhavas (up to sloka 37): If Paridhi is in Tanu Bhava , the native will be learned, truthful, peaceful, rich, endowed with sons, pure, charitable, and dear to elders.

27. If Paridhi is in Dhan Bhava, the native will be wealthy, charming, will enjoy pleasures, be happy, very religious, and be a lord.

28. If Paridhi is in Sahaj Bhava, the native will be fond of his wife, be very charming, pious, well disposed to his men, be a servant, and be respectful of his elders.

29. If Paridhi is in Bandhu Bhava, the native will be wonder-struck, helpful to enemies as well, kind, endowed with everything and be skilful in singing.

30. If Paridhi is in Putr Bhava, the native will be affluent, virtuous, splendorous, affectionate, religious, and dear to his wife.

31. If Paridhi is in Ari Bhava, the native will be famous and wealthy, be endowed with sons and pleasures, be helpful to all, and will conquer his enemies.

32. If Paridhi is in Yuvati Bhava, the native will have limited number of children, be devoid of happiness, be of mediocre intelligence, very hard-head, and will have a sickly wife.

33. If Paridhi is in Randhr Bhava, the native will be spiritually disposed, peaceful, strong-bodied, firm in decision, religious and gentle.

34. If Paridhi is in Dharm Bhava, the native will be endowed with sons, be happy, brilliant, very affluent, be devoid of excessive passion, be honourable and be happy with even an iota.

35. If Paridhi is in Karm Bhava, the native will be versed in arts, will enjoy pleasures, be strong-bodied, and be learned in all Shastras.

36. If Paridhi is in Labh Bhava, the native will enjoy pleasures through women, be virtuous, intelligent, dear to his people, and will suffer disorders of digestive fire.

37. If Paridhi is in Vyaya Bhava, the native will always be a spend thrift, be miserable, firm, and will dishonour elders.

38. Effects of Chap (Indr Dhanus or Kodanda) (up to sloka 49): If Chap is in Tanu Bhava, the native will be endowed with wealth, grains and gold, be grateful, agreeable, and devoid of all actions.

39. If Chap is in Dhan Bhava, the native will speak affably, be very rich, modest, learned, charming, and religious.

40. If Chap is in Sahaj Bhava, the native will be a miser, be versed in many arts, will indulge in thieving, be devoid of some limb, and be unfriendly.

41. If Chap is in Bandhu Bhava, the native will be happy, endowed with quadrupeds, wealth, grains, etc., be honoured by the king, and be devoid of sickness.

42. If Chap is in Putr Bhava, the native will be splendorous, far-sighted, pious, affable, and will acquire prosperity in all his undertakings.

43. If Chap is in Ari Bhava, the native will destroy his enemies, be happy, affectionate, pure, and will achieve plentifulness in all his undertakings.

44. If Chap is in Yuvati Bhava, the native will be wealthy, endowed with all virtues, learned in Shastras, religious, and agreeable.

45. If Chap is in Randhr Bhava, the native will be interested in others' [213] jobs, be cruel, interested in others' wives, and have a defective limb.

46. If Chap is in Dharm Bhava, the native will perform, penance, will take to religious observations, be highly learned, and be famous among men.

47. If Chap is in Karm Bhava, the native will be endowed with many sons, abundant wealth, cows, buffaloes, etc., and will be famous among men.

48. If Chap is in Labh Bhava, the native will gain many treasures, will be free from diseases, very fiery in disposition, affectionate to his wife, and will have knowledge of mantras and weapons (or missiles).

49. If Chap is in Vyaya Bhava, the native will be wicked, very honourable, evil in disposition, shameless, will go to other's females, and be ever poor.

50. Effects of Dhwaj (or Sikhi, or Upaketu) in Various Bhavas (up to sloka 61): If Dhwaj is in Tanu Bhava, the native will be skilful in all branches of learning, be happy, efficient in speech, agreeable, and be very affectionate.

51. If Dhwaj is in Dhan Bhava, the native will be a good and affable speaker, be splendorous, will write poetry, be scholarly, honourable, modest and endowed with conveyances.

52. If Dhwaj is in Sahaj Bhava, the native will be miserly, cruel acts, thin-bodied, poor, and will incur severe diseases.

53. If Dhwaj is in Bandhu Bhava, the native will be charming, very virtuous, gentle, interested in Vedic Knowledge, and be always happy.

54. If Dhwaj is in Putr Bhava, the native will be happy, will enjoy pleasures, be versed in arts, skilled in expedients, intelligent, eloquent and will respect elders.

55. If Dhwaj is in Ari Bhava, the native will be ominous for material relatives, will win over his enemies, be endowed with many relatives, valiant, splendorous, and skilful.

56. If Dhwaj is in Yuvati Bhava, the native will be interested in gambling, be sensuous, will enjoy pleasures, and will befriend prostitutes.

57. If Dhwaj is in Randhr Bhava, the native will be interested in base acts, be sinful, shameless, will blame others, will lack in marital happiness, and will take other's side.

58. If Dhwaj is in Dharm Bhava, the native will wear (religious) badges, be delighted, helpfully disposed to all, and he will be skilled in religious deeds.

59. O Brahmin, if Dhwaj is in Karm Bhava, the native will be endowed with happiness and fortunes, be fond of females,be charitable, and will befriend Brahmins.

60. If Dhwaj is in Labh Bhava, the native will ever acquire gains, be very religious honourable, affluent, fortunate, valiant, and skilled in sacrificial rites.

61. If Dhwaj is in Vyaya Bhava, the native will be interested in sinful acts, be valiant, untrustworthy, unkind, interested in others' females, and be short-tempered.

62. Effects of Gulik in Various Bhavas (up to sloka 73): If Gulik is in Tanu Bhava, the native will be afflicted by diseases, be lustful, sinful, crafty, wicked, and very miserable.

63. If Gulik is in Dhan Bhava, the native will be unsightly in appearance, miserable, mean, given to vices, shameless, and penniless.

64. If Gulik is in Sahaj Bhava, the native will be charming in appearance, will head a village,be fond of virtuous men, and be honoured by the king.

65. If Gulik is in Bandhu Bhava, the native will be sickly, devoid of happiness, sinful, and afflicted due to windy and billious excesses.

66. If Gulik is in Putr Bhava, the native will not be praise-worthy, be poor, short-lived, spiteful, mean, be a eunuch, be subdued by his wife and be a heterodox.

67. If Gulik is in Ari Bhava, the native will be devoid of enemies, be strong-bodied, splendorous, liked by his wife, enthusiastic, very friendly, and helpful in disposition.

68. If Gulik is in Yuvati Bhava, the native will subdue to his spouse, be sinful, will go to others' females, be emaciated, devoid of friendship and will live on his wife's (or a female's) wealth.

69. If Gulik is in Randhr Bhava, the native will be troubled by hunger, be miserable, cruel, very much short-tempered, very unkind, poor, and bereft of good qualities.

70. If Gulik is in Dharm Bhava, the native will undergo many ordeals, be emaciated, will perform evil acts, be very unkind, sluggish, and be a tale-bearer

71. If Gulik is in Karm Bhava, the native will be endowed with sons, be happy, will enjoy many things, be fond of worshipping gods and fire, and will practice meditation and religion.

72. If Gulik is in Labh Bhava, the native will enjoy women of class, be a leader of men, be helpful to his relatives, be short stature, and be an emperor.

73. If Gulik is in Vyaya Bhava, the native will indulge in base deeds, be sinful, defective-limbed, unfortunate, indolent, and will join mean people.

74. Effects of Pranapad's Position with reference to Lagn and in Various Bhavas (up to sloka 85): If Pranapad is in Tanu Bhava, the native will be weak, sickly, dumb, lunatic, dull witted, defective-limbed, miserable, and emaciated.

75. If Pranapad is in Dhan Bhava, the native will be endowed with abundant grains (rice and wheat ,etc.) abundant wealth, abundant attendants, abundant children, and be fortunate.

76. If Pranapad is in Sahaj Bhava, the native will be injurious, (or mischievous), proud, hard-hearted, very dirty, and be devoid of respect for elders.

77. If Pranapad is in Bandhu Bhava, the native will be happy, friendly, attached to females and elders, soft, and truthful.

78. If Pranapad is in Putr Bhava, the native will be happy, will do good acts, be kind, and very affectionate.

79. If Pranapad is in Ari Bhava, the native will be subdued by his relatives and enemies, be sharp, will have defective digestive fire, be wicked, sickly, affluent, and short-lived.

80. If Pranapad is in Yuvati Bhava, the native will be green eyed, ever libidinous, fierce in appearance, be not worth respect, and be ill-disposed.

81. If Pranapad is in Randhr Bhava, the native will be afflicted by diseases, be troubled and will incur misery on account of the king, relatives, servants and sons.

82. If Pranapad is in Dharm Bhava, the native will be endowed with sons, be very rich, fortunate, charming, will serve others, and be not wicked but be skilful.

83. If Pranapad is in Karm Bhava, the native will be heroic, intelligent, skilful, be an expert in carrying out royal orders, and all worship gods.

84 If Pranapad is in Labh Bhava, the native will be famous, virtuous, learned, wealthy, fair-complexioned, and attached to mother.

85. If Pranapad is in Vyaya Bhava, the native will be mean, wicked, defective-limbed, will hate Brahmins and relatives, and suffer from eye diseases or be one-eyed.

86-87. 0 Brahmin, these are the effects for Dhum, etc., (and Pranapad Lagn). Before declaring these results, the effects of Surya and other grahas should be wisely conceived by their positions, relations, and drishtis apart from their strength or weakness.


Chapter 26
Evaluation of Drishtis of Grahas

1. O Glorious, it is said that drishtis (of grahas) and their strengths are to be known in deciding the effects. How many kinds are these? Please clarify doubts.

2-5. Drishtis of the grahas: O Brahmin, I have earlier stated drishtis based on rashis. The other kind is between grahas which I detail below. 3rd and 10th, 5th and 9th, 4th and 8th, and lastly 7th: on these places the drishtis increase gradually in slabs of quarters i.e 1/4, 1/2, 3/4th, and full. The effects (due to such drishtis) will also be proportionate. All grahas give a drishti to the 7th fully. Shani, Guru and Mangal have special drishtis respectively on the 3rd and the10th, the 5th and the 9th, and the 4th and the 8th. The ancient preceptors have explained these which ordinary (arising by mere rashi positions). By subtle mathematical calculations, these drishtis will have to be clearly understood as under.

6-8. Evaluations of the Drishtis of the Grahas: Deduct the longitude of the grah (or bhava) that receives a drishti from that of the grah which gives the drishti. If the sum exceeds six rashis (or 180 degrees) deduct the sum again from 10 rashis (or 300 degrees). Convert the latter sum into degrees and divide by two. The resultant product is Drishti Kona (or aspectual angle). If the difference (between the grah that gives the drishti and the grah that receives the drishti) is in excess of 5 rashis, ignore the rashis and multiply the degrees, etc., by 2 which is the value of the drishti. If the difference is in excess of 4 rashis deduct it from 5 rashis (or 150 degrees) and the resultant degees, etc., become the Drishti value. If the difference is in excess of 3 rashis deduct it from 4 rashis (or 120 degrees) and 'halve the product to be increased by 30' (?) to get the Drishti value. If the difference is above 2 rashis ignore the rashis and add 15 to the degrees, etc., to get the Drishti value. If it is in excess of one rashi, ignore the rashis and divide the degrees by 2 to get Drishti value. 

9-10. Special consideration for Shani's drishtis: O Brahmin, if Shani is the grah that gives a drishti find out the difference between him and the grah that receives the drishti; if the sum is above 1 rashi, multiply the degrees, etc., (ignoring rashi) by 2 to get the Drishti value. If the sum is above nine rashis, the degrees to elapse be doubled to get the Drishti value. If the sum is above 2 rashis, the degrees, etc., (in excess of 2 rashis) be halved and deducted from 60. If the sum exceeds 8 rashis, add to the degrees, etc., a figure of 30 to get the Drishti value. In other cases, the sums be processed as explained earlier.

11. Special consideration for Mangal's drishtis: Deduct the longitude of Mangal from that of the grah that receives the drishti (from Mangal). If the sum is 3 rashis & c (?) or 7 rashis & c, the degrees, etc., (after ignoring rashis) be reduced from 60. If it is above 2 rashis, the degrees, etc., be increased by half of it (i.e. add 50x) and superadd 15. If the sum is 6 rashis, one Rup is the value.

12. Special consideration for Guru's drishtis: Deduct the longitude of Guru from that of the grah taht receives the drishti from Guru. If the resultant sum is 3 rashis & c or 7 rashis & c, halve the degrees, etc., (ignoring rashis) and increase it by 15. It the sum is 4 rashis & c or 8 rashis 8 & c, the degrees, etc., (ignoring rashis) be subtracted from 60 This will be the Drishti value. The sum being in conformity with others than these be treated as stated earlier.


Chapter 27
Evaluation Of Strengths

Shad Bal consists of the following:
Sthan Bal (or positional strength);
Dig Bal (or directional strength); 
Kaal Bal (Temporal Strength) inclusive of Ayan Bal (or equinoctial strength);
Chesht Bal (or motional strength);
Naisargika Bal (or natural strength);
Drik Bal (or aspectual strength).

These strengths are computed for the seven grahas from Surya to Shani. The nodes are not considered. Sthan Bal comprises of the following considerations:
Uchch Bal (or exaltation strength),
Sapt Vargaj Bal (or strength accruing out of positions in Rashi, Hora, Dreshkan, Saptamsh, Navamsh, Dvadashamsh, and Trimshamsh).
Ojhayugmarashiamsh Bal (strength acquired by placement in odd or even rashi and in odd or even Navamsh).
Kendradi Bal (due to placement in Kon, or Panaphara, or Apoklima Bhava).
Dreshkan Bal (due to placement in first, second or third decanate of a rashi). 

Kaal Bal (or Temporal Strength) comprises of the following sub divisions:
Nathonnata Bal (diurnal and nocturnal strengths).
Paksh Bal (Paksh=fortnight).
Tribhag Bal (strength due to day/night being made in 3 parts)
Varsh, Maas, Dina, and Hora Bal (Varsh = astrological year, Maas = month, Dina = week day, and Hora = planetary hour).
Ayan Bal (equinoctural strength)
Yudhdh Bal (strength due to partaking in war between grahas)

1-1 1/2. Sthan Bal (up to sloka 6) Firstly Uchch Bal: Now, about the strengths by classes positional, temporal, etc.. (Firstly, Uchch Bal forming part of positional strength or Sthan Bal). Deduct from the longitude of the grah its (deep) debilitation point. If the sum is less than 6 rashis, consider it as it is; if it exceeds 6 rashis, deduct the same from 12 rashis. The sum so got be converted into degrees, etc., and divided by 3 which is the grah's Uchch Bal (or exaltation strength) in Virupas.

2-4. Sapt Vargaj Bal: If a grah is in its Mooltrikon Rashi, it gets 45 Virupas, in Svasth Rashi, 30 Virupas, in Pramudit Rashi 20 Virupas, in Shant Rashi 15 Virupas, in Din Rashi 10 Virupas, in Duhkhit Rashi 4 Virupas, and in Khal Rashi 2 Virupas. Similarly, these values occur for the other 6 divisional occupations, viz. Hora, Dreshkan, Saptamsh, Navamsh, Dvadashamsh, and Trimshamsh. When all these are added together the grah's Sapt Vargaj Bal emerges.

4 1/2. Ojhayugmarashiamsh Bal: Each of Shukr and Chandr in even rashis and others in odd rashis acquire a quarter of Rupa (i.e. 15 Virupas). These are applicable to such Navamshas also. 

5. Kendradi Bal: A grah in a Kon gets full strength, while one in Panaphara Bhava gets half, and the one in Apoklima Bhava gets a quarter (of Rupa) as Kendradi Bal.

6. Dreshkan Bal: Male, female, and hermaphrodite grahas respectively get a quarter Rupa according to placements in the first, second and third decanates.

7-7 1/2. Dig Bal (or Directional Strength): Deduct Bandhu Bhava (i.e. Nadir) from the longitudes of Surya and Mangal; Yuvati Bhava (i.e. descendant) from that of Guru and Buddh; Karm Bhava (i.e. meridian) from that of Shukr and Chandr; and lastly Lagn from that of Shani. If the sum is above 180 degrees deduct the sum from 360. The sum arrived in either way be divided by 3 which will be Dig Bal (or Directional Strength ) of the grah.

8-9. Kaal Bal (or Temporal Strength) (up to sloka 17): Firstly, Nathonnata Bal: Find out the difference between midnight and the apparent birth time which is called Unnata. Deduct Unnata from 30 ghatis to obtain Nata. Double the Nata in ghatis which will indicate identical Nata Bal for Chandr, Mangal, and Shani. Deduct the Nata from 60 to know the Unnata Bal of Surya, Guru, and Shukr. Buddh, irrespective of day and night, gets full Nathonnata Bal (i.e. 1 Rupa or 60 Virupas).

10-11. Paksh Bal: Deduct from Chandr's longitude that of Surya. If the sum exceeds 6 rashis, deduct the same from 12. The product so obtained be converted into degrees, etc., and divided by 3 which will indicate the Paksh Bal of each of the benefic grahas. The Paksh Bal of benefic should be deducted from 60 which will go to each malefic as Paksh Bal.

12. Tribagh Bal: One Rupa is obtained by Buddh (if birth is) in the first one third part of day time, by Surya in the second one third part of the day and by Shani in the last third part of the day. Similarly, Chandr, Shukr, and Mangal get full Bal (of one Rupa) in the first, second, and last one third parts of the night. Guru gets this Bal at all times.

13. Varsh - Maas - Dina - Hora Bal: 15, 30, 45, and 60 Virupas are in order given to Varsh lord, Maas lord, Dina lord, and Hora lord. Naisargika Bal (or natural strength) has already been explained. (The Varsh lord is the lord of the day on which the astrological year of birth starts. To calculate this we first need the number of days past from the beginning of Creation, the Ahargan.

According to late Rev. Ebenezer Burgess, who translated Surya Siddhanta in English, as on January 1, 1860, the number of days past from the beginning of Creation are 714, 404, 108, 573. Divide the number of days past from the day of Creation till the day of birth by 60. Reject remainder and multiply the quotient by 3. Increase the post-multiplied product by 1 and divide by 7. The remainder will indicate the week day on which the astrological year giving birth to the native opened. Remainder 1 indicates Sunday, 2 indicates Monday, and so on and so forth. Maas lord: Divide the same Ahargan by 30 and the quotient (devoid of remainder) indicates months passed from Creation to birth. The completed months be multiplied by 2 and increased by 1. The latter sum should be divided by 7 and the remainder indicates on which day the birth month began. Continuing with the same case, we divide 65295 by 30. Quotient is 2176. This sum multiplied by 2 and increased by 1 denotes 4353. Dividing 4353 by 7, we get a remainder of 6 denoting Friday. That is, the month of birth began on Friday and the Maas Bal goes to Shukr, the lord of Friday. Dina lord: Though the week day of birth can be known from ephemeris or perpetual calendars, we better adopt the method prescribed which will confirm if the Ahargan followed is correct or is otherwise. The number of days as arrived above indicating Ahargan be divided by 7 and the remainder will indicate the week day of birth. Hora Bal: Hora means planetary hour. Each day from sunrise to sunrise is divided into 24 equal parts of one hour or 2.5 ghatikas. These Horas are ruled by the 7 grahas from Surya to Shani. The first Hora of the day is ruled by the lord of the week day. The 2nd one is ruled by the lord of the 6th week day counted from the first ruler. The 3rd Hora is ruled by the lord of the 6th week day counted from the 2nd Hora lord. Similarly, it proceeds in the same manner till the first Hora of the next day is taken over by the lord of that day himself. Whichever grah rules the birth Hora gets the Hora Bal. Horas are to be calculated for mean local time and not standard time of births).

14. Naisargika Bal (Natural Strength): Divide one Rupa (or 60 Virupas) by 7 and multiply the resultant product by 1 to 7 separately, which will indicate the Naisargika Bal due to Shani, Mangal, Buddh, Guru, Shukr, Chandr, and Surya, respectively.

15-17. Ayan Bal: 45, 33, and 12 are the Khandas for calculating Ayan Bal. Add Ayanamsh to the grah (for which Ayan Bal is required) and find out the Bhuja (distance from the nearest equinox). Add the figure corresponding to the rashi (of the Bhuja) to the Bhuja. The degrees, etc., of the Bhuja (devoid of rashi) should be multiplied by the figure corresponding to the highest of the left out Khandas and divided by 30. Add the resultant product to the sum obtained earlier. Convert this to rashi, degrees, minutes, and seconds. If Chandr and Shani are in Tula or ahead add to this 3 Rashis, and if in Mesh to Kanya reduce from this 3 Rashis. Similarly, it is reverse for Surya, Mangal, Shukr, and Guru (i.e. addition or deduction in converse). For Buddh 3 Rashis are always additive. The resultant sum in Rashi, degrees, and minutes be divided by 3 to get the Ayan Bal in Rupas.

Notes: Ayan Bal can be found out on the following simple formula. 23 degrees 27' + Kranti Ayan Bal = ------------------------ x 60 = 46 degrees 54' (23 degrees 27' plus or minus Kranti) x 1.2793 The following points have to be remembered in respect of Krantis. When Chandr or Shani have Southern Kranti, or when Surya, Mangal, Guru, or Shukr have Northern Kranti, take plus. In a contrary situation in respect of these 6 grahas, take minus. As far as Buddh is concerned, it is always plus whether he has Southern Kranti or Northern Kranti. Krantis (or declinations) can be ascertained from a standard modern ephemeris. Surya's Ayan Bal is again multiplied by 2 whereas for others the product arrived in Virupas is considered as it is.

18. Motional Strength for Surya and Chandr: Surya's Chesht Bal (or motional strength) will correspond to his Ayan Bal. Chandr's Paksh Bal will itself be her Chesht Bal.

19. Drik Bal (Strength of Drishti): Reduce one fourth of the Drishti Pinda if a grah receives malefic drishtis and add a fourth if it receives a drishti from a benefic. Super add the entire drishti of Buddh and Guru to get the net strength of a grah.

20. War Between Grahas: Should there be a war between the starry grahas (i.e. between 2 grahas from Mangal to Shani, in a given Janm Kundali), the difference between the Shad Balas of the two should be added to the victor's Shad Bal and deducted from the Shad Bal of the vanquished. 

21-23. Motions of Grahas (Mangal to Shani): Eight kinds of motions are attributed to grahas. These are Vakr (retrogression), Anuvakr (entering the previous rashi in retrograde motion), Vikal (devoid of motion or in stationary position), Mand (somewhat slower motion than usual), Mandatar (slower than the previous mentioned motion), Sama (somewhat increasing in motion as against Mand), Char (faster than Sama) and Atichar (entering next rashi in accelerated motion). The strengths allotted due to such 8 motions are: 60, 30, 15, 30, 15, 7.5, 45, and 30.

24-25. Motional Strength for Mangal, etc.: Add together the mean and true longitudes of a grah and divide the one by two. Reduce this sum from the Seeghroch (or apogee) of the grah. The resultant product will indicate the Chesht Kendra (or Seeghr kendra) of the Grah from 12 rashis. The rashi, degrees, and minutes so arrived should be converted into degrees, minutes, etc., and divided by 3 which will denote the motional strength of the grah. Thus, there are six sources of strength called Sthan, Bal, Dig Bal, Kaal Bal, Drik Bal, Chesht Bal, and Naisargika Bal.

26-29. Bhava Balas: Thus, I explained about the strengths of the grahas. Deduct Yuvati Bhava (longitude of descendant) from the bhava if the bhava happens to be in Kanya, Mithun, Tula, Kumbh or the first half of Dhanu. If Mesh, Vrishabh, Simh, or first half of Makar, or the second half of Dhanu happen to be the bhava, deduct Bandhu Bhava (Nadir) from it. Should the bhava be in Kark or in Vrischik deduct from it Lagn. Deduct Karm Bhava (Meridian) from the bhava happening to fall in Makar second half, or Meen. Convert the product so obtained (in the respective case) into degrees etc., and divide by 3 to get Bhava Bal. If the balance in the process of deducting Nadir, Meridian, Lagn, or Yuvati exceeds 6 rashis, deduct it again from 12 rashis before converting into degrees and dividing by 3. The product after division should be increased by one fourth if the bhava in question receives a benefic drishti. If the bhava receives a malefic drishti one fourth should be reduced. If Guru or Buddh give a drishti to a bhava, add that grah's Drik Bal also. And then, super add the strength acquired by the lord of that bhava. This will be the net Bhava Bal.

30-31. Special Rules: The bhavas occupied by Guru and Buddh will each get an addition of 1 rupa, while each of the bhavas occupied by Shani, Mangal, and Surya suffer 1 rupa reduction. 15 Virupas will have to be added to the bhavas falling in Seershodaya Rashis if birth happens to be in day time, to the bhavas falling in dual (or common) rashis if birth happens to be in twilight and to the bhavas falling in Prishtodaya Rashis if birth be in night time.

32-33. Shad Bal Requirements: 390, 360, 300, 420, 390, 330, and 300 Virupas are the Shad Bal Pindas needed for Surya, etc., (up to Shani) to be considered strong. If the strength exceeds the above mentioned values, the grah is deemed to be very strong. (In rupas the minimum Shad Bal requirements of the grahas are: Surya = 6.5 Rupas Chandr= 6.0 Rupas Mangal = 5.0 Rupas Buddh = 7.0 Rupas Guru = 6.5 Rupas Shukr = 5.5 Rupas Shani = 5.0 Rupas ) If a Grah has the required Shad Bal, it will prove favourable to the native by virtue of its strength. However, Shani's extreme strength will give long life as well as miseries (grief).

34-36. Guru, Buddh, and Surya are strong if each of their Sthan Bal, Dig Bal, Kaal Bal, Chesht Bal, and Ayan Bal are respectively 165, 35, 50, 112 and 30 Virupas. The same required for Chandr and Shukr are 133, 50, 30, 100, and 40. For Mangal and Shani these are 96, 30, 40, 67, and 20. Guru, Buddh, Chandr, Shukr. Mangal, Shani. Surya Sthan Bal 165 133 96 Dig Bal 35 50 30 Kaal Bal 50 30 40 Chesht Bal 112 100 67 Ayan Bal 30 40 20

37-38. Bhava Effects: O Brahmin, thus the various sources of strengths be gathered together and effects declared. Whatever Yogas, or effects, have been stated with respect to a bhava, will come to pass through the strongest grah. 39-40. Eligibility of Issue Fruitful Predictions: O Maitreya, the words of one who has achieved skill in mathematics, one who has put in industrious efforts in the branch of grammar, one who has knowledge of justice, one who is intelligent, one who has knowledge of geography, space and time, one who has conquered his senses, one who is skilfully logical (in estimation), and one who is favourable to Jyotish, will doubtless be truthful.


Chapter 28
Isht and Kasht Balas

1. Now I narrate the benefic and malefic tendencies of the grahas based on which the Dasha effects (good or bad) can be decided.

2. Exaltation Rays: Deduct the grah's debilitation point from its actual position. If the sum exceeds 6 rashis, deduct from 12 rashis. The said sum should then be increased by 1 rashi. The degrees, etc., be multiplied by 2 which, when considered along with rashis, will indicate the Uchch Rasmi of the grah.

3-4. Chesht Rasmi: Chesht Rasmis are to be calculated from Chesht Kendr similar to Uchch Rasmi computations. The Chesht Kendras of grahas from Mangal to Shani have already been explained. Add 3 rashis to Sayan Surya (i.e. with Ayanamsh), which will be the Chesht Kendr for Surya. The sidereal longitude of Surya should be deducted from Chandr to get Chandr's Chesht Kendr. If the Chesht Kendr (for any grah) is in excess of 6 rashis, deduct it from 12 rashis. Add 1 rashi and multiply the degrees, etc., by 2 which will indicate the Chesht Rasmi of the grah.

5. Benefic and Malefic Rays: Add the Uchch Rasmis and Chesht Rasmis together and divide by two. The result will be auspicious rays (Subh Rasmis). Deduct from 8 the Subh Rasmis to obtain inauspicious rays (or Asubh Rasmis).

6. Isht and Kasht (Benefic and Malefic Tendencies): Reduce 1 from each of Chesht Rasmi and Uchch Rasmi. Then, multiply the products by 10 and add together. Half of the sum will represent the Isht Phala (benefic tendency) of the grah. Reduce Isht Phala from 60 to obtain the grah's Kasht Phala (or malefic tendency).

7-9. Isht and Kasht and Sapt Varg Phal: 60, 45, 30, 22, 15, 8, 4, 2, and 0 are the Subhankas (or Subha Griha Pankthis, or benefic points) due to a grah's placement respectively in exaltation, Mooltrikon, own, great friend's, friend's, neutral, enemy's, great enemy's, and debilitation rashi. If Subhanka is deducted from 60, Asubhanka (or Asubh Pankthi, or inauspicious points) will emerge. O Brahmin, in other vargas, these are halved.

10. A grah is considered auspicious in the first five of the said places. In the sixth place it is neutral, i.e. neither good nor bad. And in the other three places it is inauspicious.

11-12. Nature of Effects due to Dig Bal, etc.: The directional strength of a grah is itself representative of the effects due to the direction; and Dig Bal itself is indicated of effects due to the day. Whatever quantum of Dig Bal, etc., are obtained by a grah will be the extent of auspicious effects acquirable on account of that strength. Deducting those figures from 60, the extent of inauspiciousness is known. If auspiciousness is more in the case of a grah's strength, the Dasha and bhavas related to that grah will be auspicious. These are converse if inauspiciousness is predominant.

13-14. Sapt Varg Phal and Isht and Kasht (Continued): The various strengths (i.e. the other 6 vargas vide slokas 7-9 supra) be multiplied by the respective grah's Shad Bal Pinda which will indicate the auspiciousness of the Varg concerned. Auspicious or inauspicious aspect will be by multiplying the Subh or Asubh Pankthi. Similarly, auspicious or inauspicious effects will be known by multiplying the auspicious or inauspicious strength by the respective Pankthi.

15-20. Effects of a Bhava: The strength of a bhava and its lord have already been explained. The actual effects will be a combination of bhava strength and its lord's strength. If there is a benefic in the bhava add the same to the auspicious effects and deduct from inauspicious effects, which will denote the inauspicious effects. If a malefic is in the bhava, reverse the process, i.e. add inauspicious effects and deduct auspicious effects. Similarly, drishtis and Balas. If a grah is exalted or with such a dignity, add auspicious effects and reduce inauspicious effects. For debilitation etc., it is converse. In Ashtak Varg, add Bindus (auspicious points) and deduct Karanas (inauspicious points). If a bhava extends to two rashis, the rectification will be done as per both the lords. In that case which ever rashi has more Bindus that rashi will yield more favourable results concerning that bhava. If both the rashis have more auspicious Bindus take the average. Thus, the auspicious and inauspicious effects of a bhava be understood.


Chapter 29
Bhava Padas

1-3. Method of Bhava Calculation : O Brahmin, I shall now tell you about the Padas (or Arudhas) for bhavas and grahas as well, as laid down by the earlier Maharishis. The Pad of Lagn will correspond to the rashi arrived at by counting so many rashis from Lagn's lord as he is away from Tanu Bhava. Similarly, Padas for other bhavas be known through their lords. The word "Pad"exclusively denotes the Pad for Lagn (or Lagn Pad). (Names of the 12 Arudhas are: 1. Lagn Pad (or simply Pad) : Arudh of Tanu Bhava. 2. Dhan Pad : Arudh of Dhan Bhava. 3. Vikram (Bhratru) Pad : Arudh of Sahaj Bhava. 4. Matru (Sukh) Pad : Arudh of Bandhu Bhava. 5. Mantra or Putr Pad : Arudh of Putr Bhava 6. Rog or Satru Pad : Arudh of Ari Bhava 7. Dar Pad (Kalatr Pad) : Arudh of Yuvati Bhava 8. Maran Pad : Arudh of Randhr Bhava. 9. Pitru Pad : Arudh of Dharm Bhava 10. Karm Pad : Arudh of Karm Bhava. 11. Labh Pad : Arudh of Labh Bhava. 12. Vyaya Pad : Arudh of Vyaya Bhava. )

4-5. Special Exceptions: The same bhava or the 7th from it does not become its Pad. When the Pad falls in the same bhava, the 10th there from be treated as its Pad. Similarly, when the 7th becomes the Pad of a bhava, the 4th from the original bhava in question be treated as its Pad. If the ruler of a bhava be in the 4th from the bhava, then the very bhava occupied be noted as the Pad.

6-7. Padas for Grahas: Note the position of a grah and see how many rashis away is its own rashi with reference to its position. Count so many rashis from the said own rashi and the resultant rashi will become the Arudh of the grah. If a grah owns two rashis or if a rashi is owned by two grahas; consider the stronger and declare effects accordingly.

8-11. Pad and Finance: (up to sloka 15) O Brahmin, I now tell you of some effects of grahas based on Pad. If the 11th from Lagn Pad is occupied or receives a drishti from a grah the native will be happy and rich; wealth will come through various means if a benefic is related as above. A malefic will confer wealth through questionable means. If there be both a benefic and a malefic, it wil be through both means. If the grah in question (i.e. the one so related to the 11th from Lagn Pad) be in exaltation or in own rashi, etc., there will be plenty of gains and plenty of happiness.

12. 0 excellent of the Brahmins, if the 12th from Lagn Pad does not receive a drishti as the 11th from Lagn Pad receives a drishti from a grah, then, the gains will be uninterrupted.

13-15. 0 Brahmin, the quantum of gains will correspond to the number of grahas in or giving a drishti to the 11th from Lagn Pad. If there is Argala for the said 11th there will be more gains, while a benefic Argala will bring still more gains. If the said benefic causing Argala is in his exaltation rashi, the gains will be still higher. If the said 11th receives a drishti from a benefic from Lagn, the 9th, etc., gains will increase in the ascending order. In all these cases, the 12th from Pad should simultaneously be free from malefic association. A benefic placed in Lagn giving a drishti to the 11th from Arudh Lagn will be still beneficial. If the drishti is from the 9th from Lagn, it will confer much more gains.

16-17. Pad and Financial Losses: (up to sloka 21): If the 12th from Lagn Pad receives a drishti from or is yuti with both benefics and malefics, there will be abundant earnings but plenty of expenses, The benefic will cause through fair means, malefic through unfair means and mixed grahas through both fair and unfair means.

18. If the 12th from Lagn Pad is conjunct Surya, Shukr, and Rahu, there will be loss of wealth through the king. Chandr giving a drishti to (the said trio in the said bhava) will specifically cause more such losses.

19. If Buddh is in the 12th from Lagn Pad and is yuti with or receives a drishti from a benefic similarly there will be expenses through paternal relatives. A malefic so related to the said Buddh will cause loss of wealth through disputes.

20. 0 Brahmin, if Guru is in the 12th from Lagn Pad, receiving a drishti from others, the expenses will be through taxes and on the person himself.

21. 0 Brahmin, if Shani is in the 12th from Lagn Pad along with Mangal and receives a drishti from others, the expenses will be through one's co-born.

22. Gainful Sources: Whatever sources of expenses are indicated above with reference to the 12th from Lagn Pad, gains through similar sources will occur if Labh Bhava so features with reference to Lagn Pad.

23. The 7th Bhava from Pad (up to sloka 27): If Rahu or Ketu is placed in the 7th from Lagn Pad, the native will be troubled by disorders of the stomach, or by fire.

24. Should there be Ketu in the 7th from Lagn Pad receiving a drishti from or being yuti with another malefic, the native will be adventurous, will have (prematurely) grey hair and a big male organ.

25. Should one, two, or all three of Guru, Shukr, and Chandr be in the 7th from Lagn Pad, the native will be very wealthy.

26. Whether a benefic or a malefic if be exalted in the 7th from Lagn Pad, the native will be affluent, and be famous.

27. O Brahmin, these yogas as narrated by me with reference to the 7th from Lagn Pad should also be considered from the 2nd of Lagn Pad.

28. Anyone of Buddh, Guru, and Shukr being exalted in the 2nd from Lagn Pad and being with strength, will make the subject rich.

29. The yogas so far stated by me with reference to Lagn Pad be similarly evaluated from Karakamsh as well.

30-37. General: If Buddh is in the 2nd from Arudh Lagn, the native will lord over the whole country. Shukr in the 2nd from Lagn Pad will make one a poet or a speaker. If the Dar Pad (i e. the Pad of Yuvati Bhava) falls in an angle or in a trine counted from Lagn Pad or if Lagn Pad and Dar Pad both have strong grahas, the native will be rich and be famous in his country. If the Dar Pad falls in the 6th/ 8th/12th from Lagn Pad, then the native will be poor. If Lagn Pad and the 7th there from or an angle, a trine, an Upachaya there from is occupied by a strong grah, there will be happiness between the husband and wife. If Lagn Pad and Dar Pad are mutually in Kendras or Konas, there will be amity between the couple; if these be in mutually 6th/8th/12th, doubtlessly mutual enmity will crop up. O Brahmin, similarly, mutual relationship, or gain, or loss through son, etc., be known based on Lagn Pad and the relative Bhava Pad. If Lagn Pad and Dar Pad are mutually angular or 3rd and 11th or in Konas, the native will be a king ruling the earth. Similar deductions be made with reference to mutual positions of Lagn Pad and Dhan Pad.


Chapter 30
Upa Pad

1-6. 0 Brahmin, now I tell you about Upa Pad, the auspiciousness of which will confer on the native happiness from progeny, wife, etc.. The Pad of Lagn (i.e. Arudh Lagn) as discussed earlier, is (of course) of prime importance. Upa Pad is calculated for the bhava following the natal Lagn. This Upa Pad is also called Gaun Pad. O excellent of the Brahmins, if Upa Pad is yuti with or receives a drishti from a benefic grah, one will obtain full happiness from progeny and spouse. Should the Upa Pad be in a malefic's rashi or receives a drishti from or is yuti with a malefic, one will become an ascetic and go without a wife. If (in the said circumstances) there be a benefic drishti (on Upa Pad or the related malefic), or a yuti, deprival of spouse will not come to pass. In this case, Surya being exalted or in a friendly rashi, is not a malefic. He is a malefic if in debilitation or in an enemy's rashi.

Notes: Regarding Upa Pad calculations, there are more than two views on the same sloka of Maharishi Parashar, or an identical Sutra from Jaimini. In this text, the word 'Anuchar' is used which denotes "the bhava following the Lagn at birth. Normally this is Vyaya Bhava. However, when we study other commentaries on Jaimini (for example Chaukhambh Hindi edition), we are taught that it is Vyaya Bhava in the case of an odd rashi ascending, and it is Dhan Bhava in the case of an even rashi ascending. Accordingly, the Pad for the 12th or the 2nd from Lagn is called Upa Pad. In calculating Upa Pad, the rules mentioned in verses 4 and 5 of the previous chapter be kept in mind.

7-12. Effect from the 2nd from Upa Pad: If the 2nd from Upa Pad is a benefic rashi or receives a drishti from or is yuti with a benefic, the same good results (as for wife and sons) will come to pass. If there is a grah in the 2nd from Upa Pad in its debilitation rashi/debilitation amsh or is yuti with a debilitated, or malefic grah, there will be destruction of wife. If the said occupant be in its exaltation rashi, or Navamsh or receives a drishti from another grah, there will be many charming and virtuous wives. Oh Brahmin, if Mithun happens to be the 2nd from Upa Pad, then also there will be many wives. O excellent of the Brahmins, if the Upa Pad or the 2nd there from be occupied by its own lord or if the said lord is in his other own bhava, the death of wife will be at advanced age.

13-15. Wife from the 2nd of Upa Pad (up to sloka 22): If a grah being constant indicator of wife (i.e. the 7th lord, or Shukr) is in its own bhava, there will be loss of wife only at a later stage. If the lord of Upa Pad, or the constant significator of wife is in exaltation, the wife will be from a noble family; reverse will be the case, if he is debilitated (i.e. the wife will not be from a noble family). O Brahmin, if the 2nd from Upa Pad is related to a benefic, the wife will be beautiful, fortunate, and virtuous.

16. Should Shani and Rahu be in the 2nd from Upa Pad, the native will lose his wife on account of calumny or through death.

17. The native's wife will be troubled by disorder of blood, leucorrhoea ('Pradar'), etc., if Shukr and Ketu are in the 2nd from Upa Pad.

18. Buddh with Ketu in the 2nd from Upa Pad will cause breakage of bones while Rahu, Shani, and Surya will cause distress of bones.

19-22. Buddh and Rahu in the 2nd from Upa Pad will give a stout-bodied wife. If the 2nd from Upa Pad happens to be one of Buddh's rashis and is tenanted by Mangal and Shani, the wife of the native will suffer from nasal disorders. Similarly, a rashi of Mangal becoming the 2nd from Upa Pad and occupied by Mangal and Shani will cause nasal disorders to one's wife. Guru and Shani will, if be in the 2nd from Upa Pad, cause disorders of ears, and/or eyes to the wife. If Buddh and Mangal are placed in the 2nd from Upa Pad other than their own rashis, or if Rahu is with Guru in the 2nd from Upa Pad, the native's wife will suffer from dental disorders. Shani and Rahu together in one of Shani's rashis, which is the 2nd from Upa Pad, will cause lameness or windy disorders to the native's wife. These evils will not come to pass if there happens to be a yuti with or a drishti from a benefic (or from another benefic in the case of affliction being caused by a benefic himself).

23-23 1/2. O Brahmin, all these effects be deduced from the natal Lagn, Lagn Pad, the 7th from Upa Pad, and the lords there of. So say Narada and others.

25-28. About Sons: If Shani, Chandr, and Buddh are together in the 9th from one of the said places (sloka 23), there will be no son at all while Surya, Guru, and Rahu so placed will give a number of sons. Chandr so placed will give a son, while a mixture of grahas will delay the obtainment of a son. The son caused by the yuti of Surya, Guru, and Rahu (as mentioned above) will be strong, valorous, greatly successful, and will destroy enemies. If Mangal and Shani are in the said 9th , there will be no son, or a son will be obtained by adoption or brother's son will come in adoption. In all these cases, odd rashis will yield many sons, while even rashis will cause only a few.

29-30. Many Sons and Many Daughters: O Brahmin, if Simh happens to be Upa Pad and receives a drishti from Chandr, there will be a limited number of children. Similarly, Kanya will cause many daughters.

31. Co-born form Lagn Pad (up to sloka 36): Rahu and Shani in the 3rd or the 11th from Lagn Pad will destroy the co-born of the native. Rahu and Shani in the 11th will indicate the destruction of elder brothers and/or sisters, and in the 3rd younger ones.

32. If Shukr is in the 3rd or the 11th from Lagn Pad, there would have been an abortion to the mother earlier. Same is the effect if Shukr is in the 8th from natal Lagn, or from Lagn Pad.

33-36. These are the effects, O Brahmin, as stated by Maharishis for the 3rd and the 11th from Lagn Pad. Should Chandr, Guru, Buddh, and Mangal be in the 3rd or the 11th from Lagn Pad, there will be many valorous co-born. Should Shani and Mangal be in the 3rd or the 11th from Lagn Pad or give drishtis there to, younger and elder co-born will respectively be destroyed. If Shani is alone in one of the said bhavas the native will be spared, while the co-born will die. Ketu in the 3rd or the 11th will give abundant happiness from one's sisters.

37. Other Matters from Lagn Pad (up to sloka 43): If the 6th from Lagn Pad is occupied by a malefic and is bereft of a yuti with or a drishti from a benefic, the native will be a thief.

38. If Rahu is in the 7th or the 12th from Lagn Pad or gives a drishti to one of the said bhavas, the native will be endowed with spiritual knowledge and be very fortunate.

39. If Buddh is in Lagn Pad, the native will lord over a whole country, while Guru will make him a knower of all things Shukr in this context denotes a poet/speaker. (Also see ch. 29, verse 30). 

40. 0 excellent of the Brahmins, if benefics occupy the 2nd from Upa Pad or from Lagn Pad, the native will be endowed with all kinds of wealth and be intelligent.

41. One will surely become a thief if the lord of the 2nd from Upa Pad is in Dhan Bhava, and is there yuti with a malefic grah. 

42-43. 0 Brahmin, if Rahu is in the 2nd from the lord of the 7th counted from Upa Pad, the native will have long and projected teeth. Ketu in the 2nd from the lord of the 7th counted from Upa Pad, will cause stammering, and Shani in the 2nd form the lord of the 7th counted from Upa Pad will make one look ugly. Mixed will be the effects if there are mixed grahas. 


Chapter 31
Argala or Intervention from Grahas

1. O Maharishi Parashar, you have told of (some) auspicious effects related to Argala. Kindly narrate its conditions and effects.

2-9. Formation of Argala: Maitreya, I explain below Argala to know the definite effects of bhavas and grahas. Grahas in the 4th, 2nd, and the 11th (from a bhava or a grah) cause Argalas, while obstructors of the Argala will be those in the 10th, 12th, and 3rd from a bhava or a grah. If the Argala causing grah is stronger than the obstructing one, the former will prevail. Or if the number of Argalas are more than the obstructing grahas, then also the Argala will prevail. If there are 3 or more malefics in the 3rd they will cause Vipreet Argala (more effective intervention) which will also be harmless and be very favourable. The 5th is also an Argala place, while the grah in the 9th will counteract such Argala. As Rahu and Ketu have retrograde motions, the Argalas and obstructions be also counted accordingly in a reverse manner. Maharishis say that the Argala caused by one grah will yield limited effect, by two medium and by more than two excellent effects. Argalas should be counted from a rashi or a grah as the case may be. The Argala which is unobstructed will be fruitful, while the one duly obstructed will go astray. The Argala effects will be derived in the Dasha periods of the rashi or grah concerned. 

Notes: 'Argala' in Sanskrit is figuratively used to denote an impediment or obstruction. Argala is calculated from a bhava or from a grah. The 4th, 2nd, and 11th bhava occupants cause Argala for a bhava or a grah. A grah in the 10th (from where the Argala is calculated) will obstruct the Argala coming from the 4th. Similarly, a grah in 12th will counteract Argala emanating from the 2nd, while the one in 11th will impede the Argala from the 3rd. Some suggest that the Argala obstruction places are countable from the Argala place instead of from the original place or grah. This is not logical and a glance into Gochar Vedha (or obstructions during transits) will confirm our findings.

10. Special: The Argala caused by placement of a grah in the first one fourth part of the rashi is countered by another placed in the 4th quarter of the respective obstructive rashi. Similarly, 2nd quarter's Argala is eliminated by the 3rd quarter placement of another grah.

Notes: We have learnt that an Argala, for example in the 4th from a bhava or a grah is eliminated by another placed in the 10th bhava from the original grah or bhava. Here, the rules for obstruction of Argala are still narrowed down. Accordingly, there are only two circumstances of Argala getting nullified. Make the rashi in which the Argala occurs into four quarters (of 7 degrees 30 min. each). Similarly, the rashi where obstruction occurs is also made in four quarters. If the Argala causing grah is in the first quarter (or first 7 degrees 30' of the rashi), while the obstructing grah is in the 4th quarter (i.e. 22 degrees 30' - 30 degrees), the obstruction indeed will come to pass. Otherwise, not. So to say, Argala will operate and the obstruction will fail. Likewise, while the Argala grah is in the 2nd quarter of the rashi (i.e. 7 degrees 30 min - 1 5 degrees), the obstruction (grah in 15 degrees - 22 degrees 30 min: i.e. in the 3rd quarter) will combat the Argala.

11-17. Argala Effects: Should there be Argala for the Arudh Pad, for the natal Lagn, and for the 7th from both, the native will be famous and fortunate. A malefic or a benefic causing unobstructed Argala giving a drishti to Lagn, will make one famous. Similarly, a malefic or a benefic causing unobstructed Argala giving a drishti to Dhan Bhava denotes acquisition of wealth and grains; a malefic or a benefic causing unobstructed Argala giving a drishti to Sahaj Bhava denotes happiness from co-born; a malefic or a benefic causing unobstructed Argala giving a drishti to Bandhu Bhava denotes residences, quadrupeds, and relatives; a malefic or a benefic causing unobstructed Argala giving a drishti to Putr Bhava denotes sons, grand sons, and intelligence; a malefic or a benefic causing unobstructed Argala giving a drishti to Ari Bhava denotes fear from enemies; a malefic or a benefic causing unobstructed Argala giving a drishti to Yuvati Bhava denotes abundant wealth and marital happiness; a malefic or a benefic causing unobstructed Argala giving a drishti to Randhr Bhava denotes difficulties; a malefic or a benefic causing unobstructed Argala giving a drishti to Dharm Bhava denotes fortunes; a malefic or a benefic causing unobstructed Argala giving a drishti to Karm Bhava denotes royal honour; a malefic or a benefic causing unobstructed Argala giving a drishti to Labh Bhava denotes gains; and a malefic or a benefic causing unobstructed Argala giving a drishti to Vyaya Bhava denotes expenses. The Argala by benefics will give various kinds of happiness, while benefic effects will be meddling with malefic Argalas. Argala by both benefics and malefics will yield results. 

Notes: For our own benefit we should understand the word 'Argala' in a suitable manner apart from the manner the Argala functions vis-a-vis Argala elimination.
1. Argala can be caused by a benefic which is known as Subh Argala. This Argala can be from a malefic also, so that the benefic causing Argala stalls the malefic role going against the native. If the benefic's Argala is obstructed by another, then the benefic will become ineffective in Argala and the first-mentioned malefic will operate freely.
2. Argala can be by a malefic with reference to a benefic, so that the native does not enjoy good effects due to the benefic. This is Pap Argala (or malefic Argala). If the Argala is eliminated by a benefic or a malefic, then again the first mentioned benefic will be at liberty to act according to his own disposition.
3. Argala is operable with reference to bhavas as well. Other relative rules need to be well understood before application of the Argala.

18. Should there be (unobstructed) Argala for Lagn, Putr, and Dharm Bhava the native will doubtlessly become a king and fortunate.


Chapter 32
Karakatwas of the Grahas

1-2. I now detail below Atma Karak, etc., obtainable from among the 7 grahas, viz. Surya to Shani. Some say that Rahu will become a Karak when there is a state of similarity in terms of longitude between (two) grahas. Yet, some say that the 8 grahas including Rahu will have to be considered irrespective of such a state.

3-8. Atma Karak Defined: Among the grahas from Surya, etc., whichever has traversed maximum number of degrees in a particular rashi is called Atma Karak. If the degrees are identical, then the one with more minutes of arc, and if the minutes are also identical then the one with higher seconds of arc, have to be considered. In that case, these three are called Anthya Karak, Madhya Karak, and Upakheta. In the case of Rahu, deduct his longitude in that particular rashi from 30. The karakas will have to be decided as above and as per further rules given below. Out of these Karakas, Atma Karak is the most important and has a prime say on the native just as the king is the most famous among the men of his country and is the head of all affairs and is entitled to arrest and release men.

9-12. Importance of Atma Karak: O Brahmin, as the minister cannot go against the king, the other karakas, viz, Putr Karak, Amatya Karak, etc., cannot predominate over Atma Karak in the affairs of the native. If the Atma Karak is adverse, other karakas cannot give their benefic effects (fully). Similarly, if Atma Karak is favourable, other karakas cannot predominate with their malefic influences.

13-17. Other Karakas: The grah next to Atma Karak in terms of longitude is called Amatya Karak. Similarly, following one another in terms of longitude are Bhratru Karak, Matru Karak, Pitru Karak, Putr Karak, Gnati Karak, and Stri Karak. These are Char karakas or inconstant significators. Some consider Matru Karak and Putr Karak as identical. If two grahas have the same longitude, both become the same Karak in which case there will be a deficit of one Karak. In that circumstance, consider constant significator in the context of benefic/malefic influence for the concerned relative.

Notes: A total of eight Char Karakas (inconstant, or variable significators) are suggested as under: 1. Atma Karak (highest in longitude devoid of rashis) 2. Amatya Karak (next to Atma Karak in longitude) 3. Bhratru Karak (next to Amatya Karak in longitude) 4. Matru Karak (next to Bhratru Karak in longitude) 5. Pitru Karak (next to Matru Karak in longitude) 6. Putr Karak (next to Pitru Karak in longitude) 7. Gnati Karak (next to Putr Karak in longitude) 8. Stri Karak (next to Gnati Karak in longitude)

18-21. Constant Karakatwas: I narrate below the constant Karakatwas as related to the grahas. The stronger among Surya and Shukr indicates the father, while the stronger among Chandr and Mangal indicates the mother. Mangal denotes sister, brother-in-law, younger brother, and mother. Buddh rules maternal relative, while Guru indicates paternal grand father. Husband and sons are respectively denoted by Shukr and Shani. From Ketu note wife, father, mother, parents-in law and maternal grand father. These are constant Karakatwas.

22-24. Bhavas Related: These constant significances are derivable from the bhavas counted from the said constant Karakatwas. The 9th from Surya denotes father, the 4th from Chandr mother, the 3rd from Mangal brothers, the 6th from Buddh maternal uncle, the 5th from Guru sons, the 7th from Shukr wife, and the 8th from Shani death. The learned should consider all these and declare related effects accordingly.

Notes: From these three verses, the constant Karakas emerge as under as normally discussed in standard literature on Jyotish: Surya : father Chandr : mother Mangal : brothers (and sisters) Buddh : maternal relatives Guru : Sons (and daughters) Shukr : wife (or husband) Shani : death (or longevity)

25-30. Yog Karakas: O Brahmin, I make below a passing reference to Yog Karakas (or mutual co-workers). Grahas become Yog Karakas if they are in mutual angles identical with own rashis, exaltation rashis, or friendly rashis. In Karm Bhava, a grah will be significantly so. Grahas simply (i. e. not being in friendly, own, or exaltation rashis) in Lagn, Bandhu and Yuvati Bhava, do not become such Yog Karakas. Even if they be placed in other bhavas, but with such dignities as mentioned shall become Yog Karakas. With such grahas, even a person of mean birth will become a king and be affluent. One born of royal scion then, will surely become a king. Thus, the effects be declared considering the number of such grahas and the order the native belongs to.

31-34. Bhava Significance: I now narrate the significance of the bhavas. Tanu Bhava denotes the soul (self), Dhan Bhava family, finance, wife, etc., Sahaj Bhava younger brothers/sisters, Putr Bhava progeny, and Yuvati Bhava wife. It is also said that a grah in Putr Bhava becomes a Karak for wife. The Karakatwas of the bhava in order are: Surya, Guru, Mangal, Chandr, Guru, Mangal, Shukr, Shani, Guru, Buddh, Guru, and Shani.

35-37. O excellent of the Brahmins, after knowing the merits of Tanu Bhava, etc., the good and bad effects can be declared. Ari, Randhr, and Vyaya Bhava are Trikas, Dusthan, or malefic bhavas. Sahaj, Ari, Karm, and Labh Bhava are Upachayas (growing bhavas); Dhan, Putr, Randhr, and Labh Bhava are Panapharas (succedents); and Sahaj, Ari, Dharm, and Vyaya Bhava are Apoklimas (cadents). Association with Trikas will inflict evils. Kendras (i.e. Tanu, Bandhu, Yuvati, and Karm Bhava) and Konas (i.e. Putr and Dharm Bhava) are auspicious bhavas, the association with which turns even evil into auspiciousness. (Also see ch. 34 for more information).


Chapter 33
Effects of Karakamsh

1. O Brahmin, as laid down by Lord Brahma, I now tell you about the effects of Karakamsh identical with Mesh etc. (Karakamsh is the Navamsh occupied by the Atma Karak grah).

2-8. Karakamsh in Various Rashis: If Atma Karak happens to be in Mesh Navamsh, there will be nuisance from rats and cats at all times. A malefic joining will further increase the nuisance. Should Atma Karak be in Vrishabh Navamsh, happiness from quadrupeds will result. Should Atma Karak be in Mithun Navamsh, the native will be afflicted by itch, etc.. Should Atma Karak be in Kark Navamsh, there will be fear from water, etc.. If Atma Karak happens to be in Simh Navamsh, fear will be from tiger, etc.. If Atma Karak happens to be in Kanya Navamsh, itch, corpulence, fire, etc., will cause trouble, while if Atma Karak is in Tula Navamsh, he will make one a trader and skilful in making robes, etc.. Vrischik Navamsh holding Atma Karak will bring troubles from snakes etc., and also affliction to mother's breasts. There will be falls from height and conveyances, etc., if it is in Dhanu Navamsh that is occupied by Atma Karak. Makar Navamsh in this respect denotes gains from water dwelling beings and conch, pearl, coral, etc.. If it is Kumbh Navamsh holding Atma Karak, the native will construct tanks, etc.. And in Meen Navamsh the Atma Karak win grant final emancipation. The drishti of a benefic will remove evils, while that of a malefic will cause no good.

9-11. O Brahmin, if there be only benefics in Karakamsh and the Navamsh of Lagn and receives a drishti from a benefic, the native will undoubtedly become a king. Should the Kendras/Konas from the Karakamsh be occupied by benefics devoid of malefic association, the native will be endowed with wealth and learning. The combination of benefic and malefic influence will in this context yield mixed results. If the Upakheta (or Upa Grah, vide ch.32 sloka 5) is in its exaltation, or own, or friendly rashi, and is devoid of a drishti from a malefic, the native will go to heaven after death.

12. If the Atma Karak is in the divisions of Chandr, Mangal or Shukr, the native will go to others wives. Otherwise, the contrary will prevail (i.e. the native will not go to others wives).

13-18. Effects of Grahas in the Karakamsh: 0 Brahmin, if Surya is in the Karakamsh, the native will be engaged in royal assignments. If the full Chandr is there, he will enjoy pleasures and be a scholar; more so if Shukr gives a drishti to the Karakamsh. If strong Mangal is in Karakamsh, he will use the weapon spear, will live through fire and be an alchemist. Should strong Buddh be Karakamsh, he will be skilful in arts and trading, be intelligent and educated. Guru in Karakamsh denotes one doing good acts, endowed with spiritualism and Vedic learning. One will be endowed with a longevity of 100 years, be sensuous and will look after state affairs if Shukr is in Karakamsh. Shani in Karakamsh will give such livelihood as due to the natives family. Rahu in Karakamsh denotes a thief, a bowman, a machinery maker, and a doctor treating poisonous afflictions. If Ketu be in Karakamsh, one will deal in elephants and be a thief.

19-22. Rahu-Surya in Karakamsh: Should Rahu and Surya be in Karakamsh there will be fear from snakes; if a benefic gives a drishti to Rahu-Surya in Karakamsh there will be no fear, but a malefic drishti will bring death (through serpents). If Rahu and Surya occupy benefic Shad Vargas, being in Karakamsh, one will be a doctor treating poisonous afflictions, while the drishti from Mangal on Rahu-Surya in Karakamsh denotes that the native will burn either his own house or that of others. Buddh's drishti on Rahu-Surya in Karakamsh will not cause the burning of one's own house of that of others. If Rahu and Surya happen to be in Karakamsh and are in a malefic's rashi receiving a drishti from Guru, one will burn a house in one's neigbourhood, . while the drishti of Shukr will not cause such an event.

23-24. Gulik in Karakamsh: Should the full Chandr give a drishti to Gulik placed in the Karakamsh, the native will lose his wealth to thieves or will himself be a thief. If Gulik is in Karakamsh but does not receive a drishti from others, one will administer poison to others or will himself die of poisoning. Buddh's drishti in this context will give large testicles.

25-29. Effects of Drishtis on Ketu in Karakamsh: If Ketu is in Karakamsh receiving a drishti from a malefic, ones ears will be severed or one will suffer from diseases of the ears. Shukr giving a drishti to Ketu in Karakamsh denotes one initiated into religions order. One will be devoid of strength if Buddh and Shani give a drishti to Ketu in Karakamsh. If Buddh and Shukr give a drishti to Ketu in Karakamsh, one will be the son of a female slave or of a female remarried. With Shani's drishti on Ketu in Karakamsh one will perform penance or be a servant or will be a pseudo-ascetic; Shukr and Surya together giving a drishti to Ketu in Karakamsh will make one serve the king. Thus, O Brahmin, are told briefly the effects of Karakamsh.

30-31. Effects of the 2nd from Karakamsh: If the 2nd from Karakamsh falls in the divisions of Shukr or Mangal, one will be addicted to others' wives, and if Shukr or Mangal give a drishti to the 2nd from Karakamsh, the tendency will last till death. If Ketu is the 2nd from Karakamsh in a division of Shukr or Mangal, addiction to other's wives will not prevail, while the position of Guru will cause such an evil (i.e. addiction to other's wives). Rahu in the 2nd from Karakamsh will destroy wealth.

32. Effects of the 3rd from Karakamsh: A malefic in the 3rd from Karakamsh will make one valorous, while a benefic in the 3rd from Karakamsh will make one timid.

33-35. Effects of the 4th from Karakamsh: If the 4th from Karakamsh happens to be occupied by Shukr and Chandr, one will own large buildings, like palaces, etc.. Similar, is the effect of an exalted grah in the said 4th. A house made of stones is denoted by the occupation of the 4th from Karakamsh by Rahu and Shani. Mangal and Ketu in the 4th from Karakamsh indicate a house made of bricks, while Guru in the 4th from Karakamsh denotes a house made of wood. Surya in the 4th from Karakamsh will give a house of grass. If Chandr is in the 4th from Karakamsh, one will have union with his wife in an uncompounded house.

36-40. Effects of the 5th from Karakamsh :If Rahu and Mangal are in the 5th from Karakamsh, one will suffer from a pulmonary consumption, more so if Chandr gives them a drishti. The drishti of Mangal on the 5th from Karakamsh will bring boils or ulcers, Ketu's drishti on the 5th from Karakamsh will cause dysentery and other diseases caused by (impure) water. If Rahu and Gulik happen to be in the 5th from Karakamsh there will be fear from mean people and poison. Should Buddh be in the 5th from Karakamsh , the native will be an ascetic of the highest order or one holding staff. Surya in the 5th from Karakamsh denotes one using a knife. Mangal in the 5th from Karakamsh denotes one using a spear (M Shani denotes a bowman if Shani is placed in the 5th from Karakamsh. Rahu in the 5th from Karakamsh denotes a machinist. Ketu in the 5th from Karakamsh denotes a watch maker. Shukr in the 5th from Karakamsh will make one a poet and an eloquent speaker.

41-45. Effects of Karakamsh and the 5th from there: If Guru and Chandr are in Karakamsh or the 5th there of, the native will be an author. Shukr in Karakamsh or in the 5th from there will make one an ordinary writer, while Buddh in Karakamsh or in the 5th from there will indicate that the writing skills are less than those of an ordinary writer. Should Guru be alone in Karakamsh or in the 5th from there, one will be a knower of everything, be a writer, and be versed in Vedas and Vedanta philosophy, but not an oratorian or a grammarian. Mangal in Karakamsh or in the 5th from there denotes a logician, Buddh in Karakamsh or in the 5th from there denotes a Mimamsaka (follower of Karma Mimansa philosophy), Shani in Karakamsh or in the 5th from there indicates that one is dull-witted in the assembly, Surya in Karakamsh or in the 5th from there denotes that one is a musician, Chandr in Karakamsh or in the 5th from there denotes a follower of Sankhya philosophy (of Maharishi Kapila who enumerated 25 true principles with emphasis on final bliss), and indicates that one is versed in rhetorics and singing, and Ketu or Rahu in Karakamsh or in the 5th from there denotes that one is a Jyotishi. Should Guru be related to the positions of Karakamsh or the 5th from there, while the Karakamsh is caused by others than him, the effects as stated will effectively come to pass. Some say that the 2nd from Karakamsh should also be similarly considered.

46. Effects of the 6th from Karakamsh: If the 6th from Karakamsh is occupied by a malefic, the native will be an agriculturist while he will be indolent if a benefic is in the 6th from Karakamsh. The 3rd from Karakamsh should also be similarly considered.

47-48. Effects of the 7th from Karakamsh: If Chandr and Guru are in the 7th from Karakamsh, the native will beget a very beautiful wife. Shukr in the 7th form Karakamsh denotes a sensuous wife, while Buddh in the 7th from Karakamsh indicates a wife versed in arts. Surya in the 7th from Karakamsh will give a wife who will be confining domestic core, while Shani in the 7th from Karakamsh denotes a wife of a higher age bracket, or a pious and/or sick wife. Rahu in the 7th from Karakamsh will bring a widow in marriage.

49. Effects of the 8th from Karakamsh: If a benefic or the grah owning the 8th from Karakamsh happens to be in the 8th from Karakamsh, the native will be long-lived, while a malefic placed in the 8th from Karakamsh will reduce the life span. Drishti/yuti of both benefics and malefics will yield a medium span of life.

50-56. Effects of the 9th from Karakamsh: If the 9th from Karakamsh receives a drishti from or is occupied by a benefic, the native will be truthful, devoted to elders and attached to his own religion. If a malefic gives a drishti to or occupies the 9th from Karakamsh, one will be attached to his religion in boyhood, but will take to falsehood in old age. If Shani and Rahu give a drishti to or occupy the 9th from Karakamsh, one will betray his elders and be adverse to ancient learning. If Guru and Surya give a drishti to or occupy the 9th from Karakamsh, one will betray his elders and will be disobedient to them. Should Mangal and Shukr give a drishti to or occupy the 9th from Karakamsh, and are joining in six identical vargas, a female ill-related to the native will die. Buddh and Chandr giving a drishti to or occupying the 9th from Karakamsh and joining in six identical vargas will cause imprisonment of the native due to association with a female not of his own. If Guru is alone related to the 9th from Karakamsh by drishti or by yuti, the native will be addicted to females and be devoted to sensual enjoyments.

57-60. Effects of the 10th from Karakamsh: If the 10th from Karakamsh receives a drishti from or is conjoined by a benefic, the native will have firm riches, be sagacious, strong, and intelligent. A malefic giving a drishti to the 10th from Karakamsh or occupying this bhava will cause harm to his profession and deprive him of paternal bliss. Buddh and Shukr giving a drishti to the 10th from Karakamsh or conjoining this bhava will confer many gains in business (or profession) and will make him do many great deeds. Surya and Chandr giving a drishti to the 10th from Karakamsh or conjoining this place, and receiving a drishti from or be in yuti with Guru the native will acquire a kingdom.

61-62. Effects of the 11th from Karakamsh: If the 11th from Karakamsh receives a drishti from or is yuti with a benefic, the native will enjoy happiness from co-born apart from gaining in every undertaking of his. If a malefic is in the 11th from Karakamsh the native will gain by questionable means, be famous and valorous.

63-74. Effects of the 12th from Karakamsh: If the 12th from Karakamsh has a benefic, the expenses will be on good account, while a malefic in the 12th from Karakamsh will cause bad expenses. If the 12th from Karakamsh is vacant, then also good effects (in respect of expenses) will follow. If there happens to be a benefic grah in exaltation or in own bhava in the 12th from Karakamsh or if Ketu is so placed and receives a drishti from or is yuti with a benefic one will attain heaven after death. One will attain full enlightenment if Ketu is in the 12th (from Karakamsh) identical with Mesh or Dhanu and receives a drishti from a benefic. If Ketu is in the 12th from Karakamsh receiving a drishti from a malefic or is there yuti with a malefic one will not attain full enlightenment. If Surya and Ketu are in the 12th from Karakamsh the native will worship Lord Shiva. Chandr and Ketu in the 12th from Karakamsh denotes a worshiper of Gauri (a consort of Lord Shiva). Shukr and Ketu in the 12th from Karakamsh denotes a worshiper of Lakshmi (a consort of Lord Vishnu) and a wealthy person. Mangal and Ketu in the 12th from Karakamsh denotes a worshipper of Lord Subramanya (an offspring of Lord Shiva). Rahu in the 12th from Karakamsh will make one worship Durga or some mean deity. Ketu alone in the 12th from Karakamsh denotes Subramanya's or Ganesh's worshipper. If Shani is in the 12th from Karakamsh in a malefic's rashi one will worship mean deities. Shukr and Shani in the 12th from Karakamsh in a malefic's rashi will also make one worship mean deities. Similar inferences can be drawn from the 6th Navamsh counted from Amatya Karak's Navamsh.

75-76. Miscellaneous Matters (up to sloka 84): O Brahmin, if there are two malefics in a Kon from Karakamsh, the native will have knowledge of Mantras and Tantras (formulas for the attainment of super-human powers). If a malefic simultaneously gives a drishti to two malefics in a Kon from Karakamsh, the native will use his learnings of Mantras and Tantras for malevolent purposes. while a benefic's drishti will make him use the learnings of Mantras and Tantras for public good.

77-84 1/2. If Chandr is in the Karakamsh receiving a drishti from Shukr the native will be an alchemist, and if Chandr being in the Karakamsh receiving a drishti from Buddh the native will be a doctor capable of curing all diseases. If Chandr is in the 4th from Karakamsh and receives a drishti from Shukr, the native will be afflicted by white leprosy; if Chandr being in the 4th from Karakamsh receiving a drishti from Mangal the native will have blood and bilious disorders, and if Chandr being in the 4th from Karakamsh receiving a drishti from Ketu the native will suffer from black leprosy. Should Rahu and Mangal be in the 4th or 5th from Karakamsh the native will suffer from pulmonary consumption, and if simultaneously there happens to be Chandr's drishti on the 4th or the 5th from Karakamsh this affliction will be certain. Mangal alone in the 4th or the 5th from Karakamsh will cause ulcers. If Ketu is in the 4th or the 5th from Karakamsh one will suffer from dysentery and afflictions due to (impure) water. Rahu and Gulik in the 4th or the 5th from Karakamsh will make one a doctor curing poisonous afflictions or will cause troubles through poison. Should Shani be alone in the 4th or 5th from Karakamsh, the native will be skillful in archery. Ketu lonely placed in the 4th or the 5th from Karakamsh will make one a maker of watches, etc.. Buddh lonely placed in the 4th or the 5th from Karakamsh will make one an ascetic of the highest order or an ascetic holding staff. Rahu, Surya, and Mangal respectively in these places denote a machinist, a knife user, and a spear or arrow user.

85-86. Chandr and Guru in the Karakamsh or in the 5th there from denotes a writer well versed in all branches of learning. The grade of writership will comparatively descend in the case of Shukr and even further in the case of Buddh if placed in the Karakamsh or in the 5th from there. 

87-92 1/2. Grahas in the 5th from Karakamsh: Should Shukr be in the 5th from Karakamsh, the native will be eloquent and a poet. Guru in the 5th from Karakamsh denotes that he be an exponent and be all knowing, but be unable to speak in an assembly. He will be further a grammarian and a scholar in Vedas and Upanishads. Shani in the 5th from Karakamsh will make one ineffective in an assembly, while Buddh in the 5th from Karakamsh will make him skilful in Karma Mimansa (one of the six Darshanas). Mangal in Karakamsh or the 5th there from will make one justice, while Chandr in Karakamsh or the 5th from there denotes a Sankhya Yogi, a rhetoric, or a singer. Surya in the 5th from Karakamsh will make one learned in Vedanta and music. Ketu in the 5th from Karakamsh will make one a mathematician and skilful in Jyotish. Should Guru be related to the said Ketu, these learnings will be by inheritance. All these as well apply to 2nd and 3rd from Karakamsh and to the Karakamsh itself apart from applying to the 5th from Karakamsh.

93-93 1/2. Should Ketu be in the 2nd or 3rd from Karakamsh, the native will be defective in speech, more so if a malefic gives a drishti to Ketu as above.

94-99. If malefics be in Karakamsh, Arudh Lagn, and the 2nd, and 8th from these places, there will be Kemadrum Yog; the effects of which will be still severer if Chandr's drishti happens to be there. The effects due for these yogas will come to pass in the Dasha periods of the rashis or grahas concerned. Kemadrum Yog will operate additionally if there are malefics in the 2nd and 8th from the rashi whose Dasha will be in currency. The results of such Yog will also be inauspicious. If the 2nd and 8th in the Kundali cast for the beginning of a Dasha have malefics, then also Kemadrum prevails throughout the Dasha. Yegor Koshkin All quotes from Parasara about Dasa combinations:Ma/Ke/Gu/Sa/Sa Effects of the Vimshottari Dasha of Mangal

(OVDJE NESTO NEDOSTAJE!?)

27-32. If Mangal is in his exaltation rashi, in his Multrikon, in his own rashi, in Kendr, in Labh or Dhan Bhava with strength, in a benefic Amsh (Navamsh) and is associated with a benefic, there will be during his Dasha acquisition of kingdom (attainment of a high administrative or political position in Government, gain of wealth and land, recognition by Government), gain of wealth from foreign countries, and acquisition of conveyances and ornaments. There will also be happiness and good relations with co-borns. If Mangal with strength is placed in a Kendr or in Sahaj Bhava, there will be gain of wealth through valour, victory over enemies, happiness from wife and children. There will, however, be a possibility of some unfavourable effects at the end of the Dasha.

33. If Mangal is in his debilitation rashi, weak, in an inauspicious Bhava (Ari, Randhr, or Vyaya) or is associated with or receives a drishti from malefics there will be, in his Dasha, loss of wealth, distress and similar unfavourable effects. Effects of the Antar Dasha of Ketu in the Dasha of Mangal.

(OVDJE NESTO NEDOSTAJE!?)

48-49 1/2. Beneficence of the king (government), gain of wealth, little gains of land at the commencement of the Dasha and substantial later, birth of a son, conferment of authority by government, gain of cattle, etc., will be the results in the Antar Dasha of Ketu in the Dasha of Mangal, if Ketu is in a Kendr, in a Trikon, in Sahaj, or in Labh Bhava, or if Ketu is associated with or receives a drishti from benefics.

50-51 1/2. Birth of a son, increase in reputation, beneficence of Goddess Lakshmi, gains of wealth from employees, attainment of the position of a commander of an army, friendship with the king (cordial relations with high government officials), performance of oblations, gains of clothes and ornaments, etc. will be the beneficial effects, if Ketu is a Yog Karak and is endowed with strength. (Ketu assumes the role of a Yog Karak if he is yuti with a Yog Karak grah (lord of a Kendr and a Trikon)).

52-54. Effects like quarrels, tooth trouble, distress from thieves and tigers, fever, dysentery, leprosy, and distress to wife and children, etc., will be experienced if Ketu is in the 6th, the 8th, or the 12th from the lord of the Dasha (Mangal). If Ketu is in Dhan or in Yuvati Bhava, there will be diseases, disgrace, agony and loss of wealth.

(OVDJE NESTO NEDOSTAJE!?)

71. Ketu-Guru: Loss of friends, wealth and garments, opprobrium (= abusive language, disgrace, dishonour) in the house, troubles from every-where.

(OVDJE NESTO NEDOSTAJE!?)

39. Guru-Shani: Obstacles in fasting, agony, foreign journeys, loss of wealth, antagonism with kinsmen.

(OVDJE NESTO NEDOSTAJE!?)

47. Shani-Shani: Loss of luster due to fevers, leprosy, stomach troubles, danger of death from fire.

Dhanu Lagna The natives of this lagna have a well-proportioned and well-developed body. they are generally tall with a large forehead, high and bushy eyebrows, long nose, bright eyes, graceful look, fair complexion and handsome figure. The natives are hold, courageous and pushful. They face adverse situations with fortitude. They have self-confidence. They have energy, enthusiasm, vigour and vitality. In spite of all these qualities they are unable to take quick decision. They are God-fearing and love only truth. They stick to their principles. They go for higher education and are fond of travelling. They are intuitive and their intuition generally proves correct.

Aswini Nakshatra: Devata for Aswini Nakshatra is Aswi or the Duality known as Aswini Kumar Twins, the physician of the Gods. Symbol - the head of a horse. So, by the influence of this star the native is expected to be equestrian (horse-ride) or a soldier, also a physician with marvellous power to heal. The after-speak of physicians excellence or process. It is possible, in the horoscopes of these physicians it will be seen that the Graha for successful medical practice is positioned in Aswini Nakshatra. >From Aswi is supposed to be derived carriages for animals for transport, everything related to transport and transport department. The Puranas relate that the two Aswini Kumaras were born of mother Sanga and father Ravi. The mother held the solar semen in her nostrils, for otherwise she could not hold it, it is so strong. They are the twins of Sanga and therefore this Nakshatra is supposed to produce twins, Mangal in this Nakshatra - specially if the Lagna is in Kumbha and Mangal in bhatristhan indicates twin brother and sister for the native. Or if Ravi, Guru or Pitri Karaka or lord of the Bhava signifying father or son in a similar way is in this Nakshatra then the father or any of the uncles or any of the children may be one of the twin.

Hasta Nakshatra: Spread from 10: to 23:20' Kanya. Deity Surya, Lord Budha, symbol - closed hand. The 12 names of the sun are: (1) Arun, (2) Aditya, (3) Tapan, (4) Divakar, (5) Bhaskar, (6) Bhanu, (7) Martanda, (8) Mihir, (9) Ravi, (10) Bivakar, (11) Sahasramsu and (12) Surya. All the attributes of these names etymologically connotes are caused by this star. From the Surya we derive creativity and creation, and from creation we derive light, lustre, and strength. Surya is the prime cause of dominion, kingship, power of immunity and the light that dispels darkness. Budha is the cause of knowledge. If placed in this star he sheds light all around. Ravi with this Nakshatra enhances the instinct of dominion and the capacity to rule over others. It brushes up human intelligence, making it more luminous and makes a man vibrant with life and light. The symbol is a closed hand or fist. It would follow that is signifies determination and clenched resolution. To keep everybody within one's grip, the possessive instinct follows from the nature of this star. The magician and the pick-pocket are also born under this star - variation from nobler attributes. Anthropomorphically it is the hand of Kalapurush.

Bharani Nakshatra: Devata Yama; birth star of Rahu. It extends from 13:20 t o 26:40. Symbol: Orifice of the womb (oss-mouth), lord Mangal. It is possible to hav e an idea of the nature of Bharani Nakshatra from the nature of Rahu, Mangal and Yama. To take Rahu first, 1. Rahu gives extravagant enjoyment of material pleasure and is later on the cause of sorrow, 2. Mangal gives courage, strength, exaltation and hope, 3. Yama purity, cleanliness, justice and integrity. The sense of restraint is also Yamas gift; he is the lord of Dharma, a stern disciplinarian, a ruthless expositor of truth, and a refuge for kings and law-abiding subjects. We should not always confine his interpretation to his being only the lord of death; he is the great judicature, the ultimate dispenser of reward and punishment. The story of Yama-Nachiketa is a particularly exposition of the hospitality of Yama, his sense of dharma and knowledge of it, his superb honesty and great integrity and other divine virtues. The Nakshatra of which he is the devata (God) is also in consequence the giver of whatever is good, pure, truthful and honest. The etymological meaning of Bharani is what deserves to be cultivated and preserved that is dependence, servitors, retainers or anything by which living is earned, for example salary. 

Krithika Nakshatra: This is the birth star of Chandra. Many constellations gather at the tail end of Krithika group. It extends from Mesa 26:40. The residuary 10: degree fall in Vrishabha. The Devata is Agni, Lord (Adhipati) is Mangal and Sukar. Agni is the great purifier, the great consumer of and the giver of light, heat and brightness. Agni causes the fire of life and the drive. It is also the spark of life. Without fire creation would not exist. Agni is at the base of creation and of the continuation of existence. It consumes everything. The fire of digestion in the human system and the external fire for cooking are only different manifestation of the same principle which is Agni. Agni is the symbol of brightness and brilliance, all weapons with fire-power. And other things of the same category come within the range of Krithika group. The fire is considered as purifier; for it burns away all that is wicked, dark and dull, also all that is low and sinful and inauspicious in the world. The dross thus blazed away, only effulgence and light remain. Fire gives the earth its activity and dynamic and revives it after the spells of cold that periodically inflict comatose condition of the earth. It is easy enough to deduce from fire the causal effect of the Krithika group. Mangal is the lord of that part of Krithika which is in Mesa Rashi and Mangal is like a mass of lightning in shining splendour. So, the Krithika in Mesa is devastatingly brilliant, the effulgence being closely associated with also an incendiary character. The Krithika of Vrishabha Rashi is brilliant but unlike the Krithika of Mesa, not incendiary. The lord of Vrishabha Rashi is brilliant but unlike the Krithika of Mesa, not incendiary. The Lord of Vrishabha Rashi is Sukra and Sukra stands for worship of beauty and for poetry and imagination. He is radiantly white like snow, the Kunda flower and the Utpal. He is also the encyclopedic expounder of all branches of learning. It follows that the Krithika of Vrishabha is brilliant but the brilliance does not burn, it is soft and sweet, and benign.The Krithika of Mesa Rashi is doubtless brilliant, it has plenty of heat which burns. The Krithika of Vrishabha has on the contrary a softened radiance, a wave of brightness that does not hurt.

Anuradha Nakshatra: Spread from 3:20' to 16"40' Vrscika Rashi. Lord is Mangal, Symbol - the same as that of Visakha. Visakha and Anuradha are complimentary to each other. From Anuradha is derived friendship, love, affection and other tender feature of a person's character. From Visakha is considered the ultimate objective while from Anuradha is indicated the 'action'. The difference between Visakha and Anuradha is that while the Visakha-native forgets after success about benefits derived as also the persons who helped, the Anuradha-native retains soft feeling about them, he keeps his friendship intact and does not forget the benefits. The Anuradha-native's mind is always alive and receptive to all feelings and gestures of friendship and love. He is like the sentinel always a mounting guard over emotions, but lacking the hardness or toughness of the official sentinel.

Rohini Nakshatra: The word is derived from Rohan which means to rise or to bring into existence. It extends in the Vrishabha Rashi from 10 degree to 23:20. The lord of it is Sukra, the symbol a Cart drawn by Cows. The Devata is Brahma, the prime creator of all things living, from the meanest insect to Man, the beauty of the weird, the paragon of animals. Rohini- group therefore encompasses everything that comes within the range of creation--beasts, birds, animals etc. It would also connote the process of growing, begetting, birth, production etc, in brief production, birth and creation. Rising means process of ascending, that is to say the creative evolution, the cultivation and the improvement. Mythology describes Rohini the wife of Chandra. Of all the 27 Stars-all wives of Chandra-Rohini is said to have been fond of fine dress, cosmetics and decore and was the most beloved of Chandra. The Rohini (group) is, in the line with this, considered to be the cause of a taste for fine dress, perfume, and other articles of toilet. Creation continues to exist mainly on the basis of food; and Rohini is supposed to be the cause of food. The direct and immediate cause of food is Agni and Brahma the remote cause. From this point of view the God who gives food, that is Agni, is the spiritual principle of Rohini (group) Nakshatra and because, Brahma the remote cause of food is also the Devata of Rohini; the range of influences of this group runs over the whole gamut of the visible and invisible animal world. 

Swati Nakshatra: Spread from 6:40' to 20: Tula. Lord is Sukra, the deity is the Wind and because of this latter factor this causes the attributes of the Wind. Restlessness of disposition or physical restlessness, inability to stay still at any place comes from it; also fidgetiness and noise. It is self-assured and asserting. The winds (Murut) are the Lords of North-West. The 49 of them under the 'Paban', of all Gods he is the strongest and most obstinate. From these are derived the knowledge, the physical internal adjustments of the 5 Winds - Pan, Apan, Vyan, Udan and Saman. Also from this comes the storms and the whirl-wind, the concrete disturbance of the atmosphere, A person born under this star is good at buying and selling, his wealth and property come and go quite easily. He is an independent sort of man, always striving for more independence. Asceticism is yet another attribute of this star. diseases of the wind are to be treated in reference to this . The Wind is the great scavenger, it sweats the dross and purifies. The winowing of rice bears comparison to this.

Mrigasira Nakshatra: Mrigasira Nakshatra extends from after 23:20 in Vrishabha Rashi up to 6:40 in Mithune. Presiding deity Chandra. Symbol-Antilope or Deer. The word Mriga represents forests, gardens, a search, a seeking to find, to roam about in the forests and a hunter, to seek, to blaze the trail, a guide and preceptor. An erotic affair, beauty of the countenance with particular emphasis on the radiant lustre of the face, because of Chandra. To seek as the primary characteristic of the star, to discover hidden treasures after the churning of the Sea, the Samudra Manthan of the Hindu Mythology, the mother, motherly conduct that is to say maternal instincts, self-sacrifice without hope of requital etc. Chandra is the lord of the mind, so all mental attitude, good or bad, sympathies and antipathies, patience and impatience, the fidgetiness and placidity, imagination, the gift of poetry, purity, sweetness and light, physical and mental aspects, all these come within this star and when things of sweetness and light of physic as also of the mind, both derivatives from Chandra, the horoscope of Rabindra Nath comes to mind. His Janma Lagna was Meen with Chandra there and Guru was in Karkata Rashi. Because of this yoga Rabindra Nath had something like physical translucence which was object of admiration all the world over, wherever people met. Also, at the same time his poetry enthralled the whole world. Chandra is a sub-Graha around the earth and that is why the influence of Chandra on all that happens in the earth is so paramount. And again that is why the influence of Chandra on both the body and mind is simultaneously so very great. Sukra and Chandra both are female grahas (planets) with difference that while Chandra is the Lord of motherhood, maternal instincts and all that, Sukra is the lord of feminine beauty, the structure of feminine form, the physical excellence of women and all that. In the former there is elegance and dignity of the feminine while in the latter, the physical beauty and the lure of feminine form which leads a male captive dominates. Chandra is the lord of marine products and of medicines; that it was from the sea that Chandra rose. And it is to Chandra that the influences and causalities have to be traced.

Moola Nakshatra: Spread from 0: to 13:20' Dhanu Rashi, Lord is Jupiter (Guru). Symbol - a bunch of roots tied together, deity 'Nirithi' or 'Alakshmi'. It also means the 'opposite' or 'reverse'. Moola is not one of the good stars which is evident from this that the deity is Alakshmi i.e. God of ill luck. Moola signifies roots, that is to say, everything of basic nature, its motion is finite and limited. It does not go beyond its narrow orbit. Old servant, pedlar of seeds, physician administering herbal seed remedies - every such thing is determined from this star. The Moola native looks into scientific, literary, philosophic and other basic subjects. Mortgate and Mortgaged property are governed by this star and its horizon is not rural but urban.

Uttarasarha Nakshatra: Spread from 26:40' Dhanu to 10: of Makara. Lord is Guru and Sani. The derivatives from Uttarasarha are closely allied to those of Poorbasarha. The points of difference are as follows. Poorbasarha spreads out, it is concerned with extensiveness. Uttarasarha is introspective and penetrative and is concerned with intensiveness, the results of the latter being more permanent than the former (Poorbasarha). The deity who preserves this world and makes for its welfare is called 'ganadevata'. There are ten ganadevatas Basu, Satya, Kratu, Daksha, Kala, Kama, Dhriti, Kuru, Pururaba, Madraba. All their attributes are in this star. The warrior, the wrestler, the painter, the artist, the magician, the well-dressed man, the happy and successful men are influenced by this star. A special characteristic of it is that it causes a person to be admired and socially applauded. Another characteristic of it is is that under the influence of this star the native falls in love with an unmarried girl. Vishma of the Mahabharata was one of the 8 Basus; so under this star one possesses self-control, restraint, endurance and firm character. There are special rituals for the worship of ganadevatas, which are more or less of specialised nature. The juice of Soma plant plays a part in 'yagna' and worship. 


Chapter 34
Yoga Karakas

1. O Brahmin, thus I have told you about the effects derivable through Karakamsh. Now listen to the effects arising out of lordships of grahas over bhavas.

2-7. Nature due to Lordships of Grahas: Benefics owning Kendras will not give benefic effects, while malefics owning Kendras will not remain inauspicious. The lord of a Kon will give auspicious results. The lord of Lagn is specially auspicious as Lagn is a Kendr as well as a Kon. Putr and Dharm Bhava are specially for wealth, while Yuvati and Karm Bhava are specially for happiness. Any grah owning Sahaj, Ari, or Labh Bhava will give evil effects. The effects due to the lords of Vyaya and Randhr Bhava will depend on their association. In each group, the significance will be in the ascending order. Randhr's lord is not auspicious as he owns the 12th from Dharm Bhava. If the lord of Randhr Bhava simultaneously owns Sahaj, Yuvati, or Labh Bhava, he will prove specifically harmful, while his simultaneous ownership of a Kon will bestow auspicious effects. The grah owning a predominant Bhava will stall the effects due to another owning a less significant bhava and will give his own results. Randhr's lordship of Surya and Chandr is not evil.

8-10. Natural Benefics and Natural Malefics: Guru and Shukr are benefics, while Chandr is mediocre in benefice and Buddh is neutral (i.e. a benefic when associated with a benefic and a malefic when related to a malefic). Malefics are Surya, Shani, and Mangal. Full Chandr, Buddh, Guru and Shukr are stronger in the ascending order. Weak Chandr, Surya, Shani, and Mangal are stronger (in malefic disposition) in the ascending order. In revealing maleficence due to rulership of Kendras, Chandr, Buddh, Guru, and Shukr are significant in the ascending order.

11-12. Lordships of Kendras and Konas: If there be an exchange between an lord of a Kendr and a lord of a Kon, or if a lord of a Kendr is yuti with a lord of a Kon in a Kendr or in a Kon, or if a lord of a Kon is in a Kendr or vice versa, or if there happens to be a full drishti between a lord of a Kendr and a lord of a Kon, they cause a Yog. One born in such a Yog will become a king and be famous.

13. If one and the same grah gets the lordships of a Kon as well as a Kendr, or if a grah is in a Kendr or in a Kon, it will prove specially a Yog Karak.

14. Lordship of Kendr: It has been said that a malefic owning a Kendr will become auspicious, which is true only when it simultaneously lords over a Kon and not by merely owning a Kendr. 

15. If the lords of a Kendr or a Kon own simultaneously an evil bhava. he (i.e. the lord of the Kendr or the lord of the Kon) does not cause a Raj Yog by mere relations stipulated (as per ch. 34, slokas 11 and 12).

16. Rahu and Ketu: Rahu and Ketu give predominantly the effects as due to their yuti with a bhava lord or as due to the bhava they occupy.

17. If Rahu and Ketu are in Kendr receiving a drishti from or in association with the lord of a Kon, or if Rahu or Ketu happen to be in a Kendr receiving a drishti from or in association with the lord of a Kendr it will become Yog Karak.

18. 0 Maharishi Parashar, please narrate according to the rashis rising as to which grah is a Yog Karak and which is inauspicious.

19-22. Grahas and Mesh Lagn: O Brahmin, listen to these with examples. Even though Mangal is the lord of Randhr Bhava, he will be helpful to (other) auspicious grahas. Shani, Buddh, and Shukr are malefics. Auspicious are Guru and Surya. The mere yuti of Shani with Guru will not produce auspicious effects (although they own a Kon and a Kendr). If Guru is at the disposal of a malefic, he will surely give inauspicious results. Shukr is a direct (or independent) killer. Shani, etc., will also inflict death if associated with an adverse grah (i.e Shukr).

23-24. Grahas and Vrishabh Lagn: Guru, Shukr, and Chandr are malefics. Shani and Surya are auspicious. Shani will cause Raj Yog. Buddh is somewhat inauspicious; the Guru group (Guru, Chandr, and Shukr), and Mangal will inflict death.

25-26. Grahas and Mithun Lagn: Mangal, Guru, and Surya are malefics, while Shukr is the only auspicious grah. The yuti of Guru with Shani is similar to that for Mesh Lagn. Chandr is the prime killer, but it is dependant on her association.

27-28. Grahas and Kark Lagn: Shukr and Buddh are malefics, Mangal, Guru, and Chandr are auspicious. Mangal is capable of conferring a full-fledged Yog and giving auspicious effects. Shani and Surya are killers and give effects according to their associations.

29-30. Grahas and Simh Lagn: Buddh, Shukr, and Shani are malefics. Auspicious effects will be given by Mangal, Guru, and Surya. Guru's yuti with Shukr (though respectively Kon and Kendr lords) will not produce auspicious results. Shani and Chandr are killers who will give effects according to their associations.

31-32. Grahas and Kanya Lagn: Mangal, Guru, and Chandr are malefics, while Buddh and Shukr are auspicious. Shukr's yuti with Buddh will produce Yog. Shukr is a killer as well. Surya's role will depend on his association.

33-34. Grahas and Tula Lagn: Guru, Surya, and Mangal are malefics. Auspicious are Shani and Buddh. Chandr and Buddh will cause Raj Yog. Mangal is a killer. Guru and other malefics will also acquire a disposition to inflict death. Shukr is neutral.

35-36. Grahas and Vrischik Lagn: Shukr, Buddh, and Shani are malefics. Guru and Chandr are auspicious. Surya as well as Chandr are Yog Karakas. Mangal is neutral. Shukr and other malefics acquire the quality of causing death.

37-38. Grahas and Dhanu Lagn: Only Shukr is inauspicious. Mangal and Surya are auspicious. Surya and Buddh are capable of conferring a Yog. Shani is a killer, Guru is neutral. Shukr acquires killing powers.

39-40. Grahas and Makar Lagn: Mangal, Guru, and Chandr are malefics, Shukr and Buddh are auspicious. Shani will not be a killer on his own. Mangal and other malefics will inflict death. Surya is neutral. Only Shukr is capable of causing a superior Yog.

41-42. Grahas and Kumbh Lagn: Guru, Chandr, and Mangal are malefics, while Shukr and Shani are auspicious. Shukr is the only grah that causes Raj Yog. Guru, Surya, and Mangal are killers. Buddh gives meddling effects.

43-44. Grahas and Meen Bhava: Shani, Shukr, Surya, and Buddh are malefics. Mangal and Chandr are auspicious. Mangal and Guru will cause a Yog. Though Mangal is a killer he will not kill the native (independently). Shani and Buddh are killers.

45-46. General: Thus, the auspicious and inauspicious effects derivable through the grahas due to their lordship according to the rising rashi, have to be estimated. Apart, the effects due to Nabhash Yogas, etc., should also be known which I narrate as under.


Chapter 35
Nabhash Yogas

1-2. 0 excellent of the Brahmins, explained below are 32 Nabhash Yogas which have a total of 1800 different varieties. These consist of 3 Asraya Yogas, 2 Dala Yogas, 20 Akriti Yogas, and 7 Sankhya Yogas.

3-6. Names of Nabhash Yogas: The 3 Asraya Yogas are: Rajju, Musala, and Nala Yogas; The 2 Dala Yogas are: Maal and Sarpa; The 20 Akriti Yogas are: Gada, Sakat, Shringatak, Vihag, Hal, Vajr, Kamal, Vapi, Yup, Shar, Shakti, Danda, Nisk, Koot, Chatr, Dhanushi, (or Chap), Ardh, Chandr, Chakr, and Samudr Yogas; The 7 Sankhya Yogas are: Vallaki, Daam, Paash, Kedara, Sool, Yuga, and Gola Yogas. Thus, these are 32 in total.

7. Rajju, Musala, and Nala Yogas: All the grahas in movable rashis cause Rajju Yog. All the grahas in fixed rashis cause Musala Yog. All the grahas in dual rashis cause Nala Yog.

8. Maal and Sarpa Yogas: If 3 Kendras are occupied by benefics Maal Yog is produced, (benefic results) while malefics so placed will cause Bhujang or Sarpa Yog. These Yogas respectively produce benefic and malefic results.

9-11. Gada, Sakat, Vihag, Shringatak, Hal, Vajr, and Yav Yoga If all the grahas occupy two successive Kendras, Gada Yog is formed. Sakat Yog occurs when all the grahas are disposed in Lagn and Yuvati Bhava. If all confine to Bandhu and Karm Bhava, then Vihag Yog occurs. All grahas in Lagn, Putr and Dharm Bhava cause Shringatak Yog, while all grahas are in Dhan, Ari, and Karm Bhava, or in Sahaj, Yuvati, and Labh Bhava, or in Bandhu, Randhr, and Vyaya Bhava cause Hal Yog. Vajr Yog is caused by all benefics in Lagn and Yuvati Bhava, or all malefics in Bandhu and Karm Bhava. In a contrary situation, i.e. all benefics in Bandhu and Karm Bhava or all malefics in Lagn and Yuvati Bhava, Yav Yog is generated.

12. Kamal and Vapi Yogas: If all the grahas are in the 4 Kendras, Kamal Yog is produced. If all of them happen to be in all the Apoklimas (cadent bhavas), or in all the Panapharas (succedent bhavas), Vapi Yog occurs.

13. Yup, Shar, Shakti, and Danda Yogas: If all the 7 grahas are in the 4 bhavas commencing from Lagn, they cause Yup Yog; if all the 7 grahas are in the 4 bhavas commencing from Bandhu Bhava Shar Yog occurs; if all the 7 grahas are in the 4 bhavas commencing from Yuvati Bhava Shakti Yog occurs; and if all the 7 grahas are in the 4 bhavas commencing from Karm Bhava Danda Yog is formed.

14. Nauka, Koot, Chatr, and Chap Yogas: If all the grahas occupy the seven bhavas from Lagn Nauka Yog occurs; if all the grahas occupy the seven bhavas from Bandhu Bhava Koot Yog is formed; if all the grahas occupy the seven bhavas from Yuvati Bhava Chatr Yog occurs; and if all the seven grahas occupy the seven bhavas from Karm Bhava, Chap Yog occurs. Here again, the grahas should occupy seven continuous bhavas. Quoted from saravali: If the seven grahas occupy continuously seven bhavas commencing from a bhava which is not angular to the lagna, the yoga produced is known as Ardh Chandra yoga.

15. Chakr and Samudr Yogas: If all the grahas occupy six alternative rashis commencing from Lagn, Chakr Yog is formed. Samudr Yog is produced if all grahas occupy six alternative rashis commencing from Dhan Bhava.

16-17. Sankhya Yogas: If all grahas are in one Rashi Gola Yog is formed; if all grahas are in 2 rashis, Yuga Yog is formed; if all grahas are in 3 rashis Sool Yog occurs; if all grahas are in 4 rashis Kedara Yog occurs; if all grahas are in 5 rashis Paash Yogis formed, if all grahas are in 6 rashis Daam Yog occurs; and if all grahas are in 7 rashis Veena Yog is produced. None of these seven Yogas will be operable, if another Nabhash Yog (explained earlier) is derivable.

18. Effects of Nabhash Yogas (up to sloka 50): Rajju Yog: One born in Rajju Yog will be fond of wandering, be charming, will earn in foreign countries. He will be cruel and mischievous.

19. Musala Yog: One born in Musala Yog will be endowed with honour, wisdom, wealth, etc., be dear to king, famous, will have many sons and be firm in disposition.

20. Nala Yog: One born in Nala Yog will have uneven physique, be interested in accumulating money, very skilful, helpful to relatives, and charming.

21. Maal Yog: One born in Maal Yog will be ever happy, endowed with conveyances robes, food, and pleasures, be splendorous and endowed with many females.

22. Sarpa Yog: One born in Sarpa (Bhujang) Yog will be crooked, cruel, poor, miserable, and will depend on others for food and drinks.

23. Gada Yog: One born in Gada Yog will always make efforts to earn wealth, will perform sacrificial rites, be skilful in Shastras and songs, and endowed with wealth, gold, and precious stones.

24. Sakat Yog: One born in Sakat Yog will be afflicted by diseases, will have diseased or ugly nails, be foolish, will live by pulling carts, be poor, and devoid of friends and relatives.

25. Vihag Yog: One born in Vihag Yog will be fond of roaming, be a messenger, will live by sexual dealings, be shameless, and interested in quarrels.

26. Shringatak Yog: One born in Shringatak Yog will be fond of quarrels, and battles, be happy, dear to king, endowed with an auspicious wife, be rich, and will hate women.

27. Hal Yog: One born in Hal Yog will eat a lot, will be very poor, will be miserable, agitated, given up by friends a relatives; he will be a servant.

28. Vajr Yog: One born in Vajr Yog will be happy in the beginning and at the end of life, be valorous, charming, devoid of desires, and fortunes and be inimical.

29. Yav Yog: One born in Yav Yog will observe fasts and other religious rules, will do auspicious acts, will obtain happiness, wealth and sons in his mid-life; he will be charitable and firm.

30. Kamal Yog: One born in Kamal Yog will be rich and virtuous, be long lived, very famous, and pure; he will perform hundreds of auspicious acts and he will be a king.

31. Vapi Yog: One born in Vapi Yog will be capable of accumulating wealth, be endowed with lasting wealth, and happiness and sons, be free from eye afflictions and will be a king.

32. Yup Yog: One born in Yup Yog will have spiritual knowledge and will be interested in sacrificial rites. He will be endowed with a wife, be strong, interested in fasts and other religious observations and be distinguished.

33. Shar Yog: One born in Shar Yog will make arrows, be head of a prison, will earn through animals, will eat meat, will indulge in torture and mean handiworks.

34. Shakti Yog: One born in Shakti Yog will be bereft of wealth, be unsuccessful, miserable, mean, lazy, long lived, interested and skilful in war, firm and auspicious.

35. Danda Yog: One born in Danda Yog will lose sons and wife, will be indigent, unkind, away from his men, and will serve mean people.

36. Nauka Yog: One born in Nauka Yog will derive his livelihood through water, be wealthy, famous wicked, wretched, dirty and miserly.

37. Koot Yog: One born in Koot Yog will be a liar, will head a jail, be poor, crafty, cruel, and will live in hills and fortresses.

38. Chatr Yog: One born in Chatr Yog will help his own men, be kind, dear to many kings, very intelligent, happy at the beginning and end of his life and be long-lived. 

39. Chap Yog: One born in Chap Yog will be liar, will protect secrets, be a thief, be fond of wandering forests, be devoid of luck, and be happy in the middle of the life.

40. Ardh Chandr Yog: One born in Ardh Chandr Yog will lead an army, will possess a splendorous body, be dear to king, be strong and endowed with gems, gold, and ornaments.

41. Chakr Yog: One born in Chakr Yog will be an emperor at whose feet will be the prostrating kings heads adoring gem studded diadems.

42. Samudr Yog: One born in Samudr Yog will have many precious stones and abundant wealth, be endowed with pleasures, dear to people, will have firm wealth and be, well-disposed.

43. Veena Yog: One born in Veena Yog will be fond of songs, dance and musical instruments, be skilful, happy, wealthy, and be a leader of men.

44. Daamini Yog: One born in Daamini Yog will be helpful to others, will have righteously earned wealth, be very affluent, famous, will have many sons, and gems, be courageous, and red-lettered.

45. Paash Yog: One born in Paash Yog will be liable to be imprisoned, be skilful in work, be deceiving in disposition, will talk much, be bereft of good qualities and will have many servants. 

46. Kedara Yog: One born in Kedara Yog will be useful to many, be an agriculturist, be truthful, happy, fickle minded, and wealthy.

47. Sool Yog: One born in Sool Yog will sharp, indolent, bereft of wealth, be tortuous, prohibited, valiant, and famous through war.

48. Yuga Yog: One born in Yuga Yog will heretic, be devoid of wealth, be discarded by others, and be devoid of sons, mother and virtues.

49. Gola Yog: One born in Gola Yog will be strong, be devoid of wealth, learning and intelligence, be dirty, sorrowful, and miserable.

50. Ancestors say that the results due to said (Nabhash) Yogas will be felt throughout, in all the Dasha periods.


Chapter 36
Many Other Yogas

1-2. Benefic and Malefic Yogas: If there be a benefic in Lagn, Subh Yog is produced, while a malefic in Lagn causes Asubh Yog. Benefics in both Vyaya and Dhan Bhava cause Subh Yog. Malefics in both Vyaya and Dhan Bhava cause Asubh Yog. One born in Subh Yog will be eloquent, charming, and virtuous, while his counterpart will be sensuous, will do sinful acts, and will enjoy (or swallow) others' wealth.

3-4. Gaj Kesari Yog: Should Guru be in a Kendr from Lagn or from Chandr, and be yuti with or receiving a drishti from (another) benefic, avoiding at the same time debilitation, combustion, and inimical rashi, Gaj Kesari Yog is caused. One born in Gaj Kesari Yog will be splendorous, wealthy intelligent endowed with many laudable virtues and will please the king.

5-6. Amal Yog: If there be exclusively a benefic in the 10th from Lagn or Chandr, Amal Yog exists. Amal Yog will confer fame lasting till Chandr and stars exist and will make the native honoured by the king, enjoy abundant pleasures, charitable, fond of relatives, helpful to others, pious, and virtuous.

7-8. Parvat Yog: Benefics in Kendras will produce Parvat Yog, as Yuvati and Randhr Bhava are vacant or are occupied by only benefics. One born in Parvat Yog will be wealthy, eloquent, charitable, learned in Shastras, fond of mirth, famous, splendorous, and be the leader of a city.

9-10. Kahal Yog: Should Bandhu's lord and Guru be in mutual Kendras, while Lagn's lord is strong, Kahal Yog occurs. Alternatively, Bandhu's lord being in his own or exaltation rashi should be yuti with Karm's lord. In effect, the native will be energetic, adventurous, charming, endowed with a complete army consisting of chariots elephants horses and infantry, and he will lord over a few villages.

11-12. Chamar Yog: If Lagn's lord is exalted in a Kendr and receives a drishti from Guru, Chamar Yog is formed. This Yog also occurs if two benefics are in Lagn, or Dharm, or Karm, or Yuvati Bhava. The effects of Chamar Yog are: the native will be a king or honoured by the king, long lived, scholarly, eloquent, and versed in all arts.

13-14. Shankh Yog: If Lagn's lord is strong, while the lords of Putr and Ari Bhava are in mutual Kendras, then, what is known as Shankh Yog is produced. Alternatively, if Lagn's lord along with Karm's lord is in a movable rashi, while Dharm's lord is strong, Shankh Yog is obtained. One born with Shankh Yog will be endowed with wealth, spouse and sons; he will be kindly disposed, propitious, intelligent, meritorious, and long lived.

15-16. Bhairi Yog: If Vyaya, Tanu, Dhan, and Yuvati Bhava are occupied as Dharm's lord is strong, the native obtains Bhairi Yog. Again, another kind of Bhairi Yog is formed if Shukr, Guru, and Lagn's lord are in a Kendr, while Dharm's lord is strong. The results of Bhairi Yog are: the native will be endowed with wealth, wife and sons; he will be a king, be famous, virtuous, and endowed with good behaviour, happiness, and pleasures.

17. Mridang Yog: If Lagn's lord is strong and others occupy Kendras, Konas, own bhavas or exaltation rashis, Mridang Yog is formed. The native concerned will be a king or equal to a king and be happy.

18. Shrinath Yog: If Yuvati's lord is in Karm Bhava, while Karm's lord is exalted and yuti with Dharm's lord, Shrinath Yog takes place. The native with Shrinath Yog will be equal to lord Devendra (the god of gods).

19-20. Sharad Yog: Should Karm's lord be in Putr Bhava, while Buddh is in a Kendr, as Surya with strength is in Simh, Sharad Yog is formed. This will again be obtained if Guru or Buddh is in a Kon to Chandr, while Mangal is in Labh Bhava. One born in either kind of Yog will obtain wealth, spouse and sons, be happy, scholarly, dear to the king, pious, and virtuous.

21-22. Matsya Yog: Benefics in Dharm and Tanu Bhava, mixed grahas in Putr Bhava and malefics in Bandhu and Randhr Bhava: this array of grahas at birth will produce Matsya Yog. In effect, the native will be a Jyotishi, be a synonym of kindness, be virtuous, strong, beautiful, famous, learned, and pious.

23-24. Kurm Yog: If Putr, Ari and Yuvati Bhava occupied by benefic grahas identical with own bhava, or exaltation, or friendly rashi, while malefics are in Sahaj, Labh, and Tanu Bhava, in own bhava or in exaltation, Kurm Yog is formed. The results of Kurm Yog are: the native will be a king. be courageous, virtuous, famous, helpful, happy; he will be a leader of men.

25-26. Khadg Yog: Should there be an exchange of rashis between the lords of Dhan and Dharm Bhava, as Lagn's lord is in a Kendr or in a Kon Khadg Yog is obtained. One with Khadg Yog will be endowed with wealth, fortunes and happiness, be learned in Shastras, be intelligent, mighty, grateful, and skilful.

27-28. Lakshmi Yog: If Dharm's lord is in a Kendr identical with his Mooltrikon rashi, or own rashi, or in exaltation, while Lagn's lord is endowed with strength, Lakshmi Yog occurs. The native with Lakshmi Yog will be charming, virtuous, kingly in status, endowed with many sons and abundant wealth; he will be famous and of high moral merits.

29-30. Kusum Yog: Shukr in a Kendr, Chandr in a Kon along with a benefic and Shani in Karm Bhava: these grahas thus cause Kusum Yog for one born in a fixed rashi ascending. Such a native will be a king or equal to him, be charitable, will enjoy pleasures, be happy, prime among his race men, virtuous and red-lettered.

31-32. Kalanidhi Yog: If Guru is placed in Dhan, or Putr Bhava, and receives a drishti from Buddh and Shukr, Kalanidhi Yog is caused. In effect, the native will be virtuous, honoured by the kings, bereft of diseases, be happy, wealthy, and learned.

33-34. Kalpa Drum Yog: Note the following four grahas: (a) Lagn's lord, (b) the dispositor of Lagn's lord, (c) the dispositor of the grah at "b", (d) the Navamsh dispositor of the grah at "c". If all these are disposed in Kendras and in Konas from Lagn, or are exalted, Kalpa Drum Yog exists. One with Kalpa Drum Yog will be endowed with all kinds of wealth, be a king, pious, strong, fond war, and merciful.

35-36. Trimurthi Yogas: Counted from Dhan's lord, if benefics occupy the 2nd, 12th, and 8th, Hari Yog is formed. (The native will be happy, learned, and endowed with wealth and sons). If the 4th, 9th, and 8th with reference to the rashi occupied by Yuvati's lord are occupied by benefics, Hara Yog is obtainable. (The native will be happy, learned, and endowed with wealth and sons). Brahma Yog is generated if, counted from Lagn's lord, benefics are in the 4th, 10th, and 11th rashis. One born in anyone of the said three Yogas will be happy, learned, and endowed with wealth and sons.

37. Lagn Adhi Yog: Should benefics be in Yuvati and Randhr Bhava counted from Lagn, and be devoid of yuti with, and/or drishti from malefics, Lagn Adhi Yog is produced making one a great person, learned in Shastras and happy.

38-39. Effects of Lagn's Lord's Division Dignities: Lagn's lord in Parijatamsh will make one happy; Lagn's lord in Vargottama will give immunity to diseases; Lagn's lord in Gopuramsh will make one rich with wealth and grains; Lagn's lord in Simhasanamsh will make one a king; Lagn's lord in Paravatamsh will make one a scholar; Lagn's lord in Devalokamsh will make one opulent and endowed with conveyances; and Lagn's lord in Iravatamsh will make one famous and honoured by kings. (Vargottama indicates a grah occupying the same Rashi and the same Navamsh).


Chapter 37
Chandr's Yogas

1. If Chandr with reference to Surya is in a Kendr, one's wealth, intelligence and skill will be little. If Chandr with reference to Surya is in a Panaphara, one's wealth, intelligence and skill will be meddling. If Chandr with reference to Surya is in a Apoklima, one's wealth, intelligence and skill will be excellent.

2-4. In the case of a day birth, if Chandr placed in its own Navamsh, or in a friendly Navamsh, receives a drishti from Guru, one will be endowed with wealth, and happiness. One born at night time will enjoy similar effects if Chandr is in its own Navamsh, or in a friendly Navamsh receiving a drishti to Shukr. In a contrary situation, the drishti from Guru, or from Shukr on Chandr will make one go with little wealth, or even without that.

5. Adhi Yog from Chandr: If benefics occupy the 8th, 6th, and 7th counted from Chandr, Adhi Yog obtains. According to the strength of the participating grahas, the native concerned will be either a king, or a minister, or an army chief.

6. Dhan Yog: Should all the (three) benefics be Upachaya, i.e. in the 3rd, the 6th, the 10th, and the 11th counted from Chandr, one will be very affluent; with two benefics placed in the 3rd, the 6th, the 10th, and the 11th one will have medium effects in regard to wealth. If a single benefic is there, the wealth will be negligible.

7-10. Sunaph, Anaph, and Duradhar: If there is a grah, other than Surya, in the 2nd from Chandr Sunaph Yog is formed; if there is a grah, other than Surya, in the 12th from Chandr Anaph Yog is formed; and if there are grahas, other than Surya, in the 2nd from Chandr and in the 12th from Chandr Duradhar Yog is caused. One with Sunaph Yog will be a king or equal to a king endowed with intelligence, wealth, fame, and self earned wealth. One born in Anaph Yog will be a king, be free from diseases, virtuous, famous, charming, and happy. One born in Duradhar Yog will enjoy pleasures; one will be charitable, and endowed with wealth, conveyances, and excellent serving force.

11-13. Kema Drum Yog: Excluding Surya, should there be no grah with Chandr, or in the 2nd and/or 12th from Chandr, or in a Kendr from Lagn, Kema Drum Yog is formed. One born in Kema Drum Yog will be very much reproached; one will be bereft of intelligence; learning is reduced to penury and perils.


Chapter 38
Surya's Yogas

1. Vesi, Vosi, and Abhayachari Yogas: Barring Chandr, if a grah among Mangal etc. be in the 2nd from Surya, Vesi Yog is formed; barring Chandr, if a grah among Mangal etc. be in the 12th from Surya, Vosi Yog is formed; and barring Chandr, if a grah among Mangal etc. be in both the 2nd and the 12th from Surya Ubhayachari Yog is caused.

2-3. Effects of Vesi, Vosi, and Ubhayachari Yogas: One born in Vesi Yog will be even sighted, truthful, long bodied, indolent, happy, and endowed with negligible wealth. One born with Vosi Yog will be skilful, charitable, and endowed with fame, learning and strength. The Ubhayachari native will be a king or a equal to a king and be happy.

4. Benefics causing Vesi, Vosi, or Ubhayachari Yogas will give the above mentioned effects, while malefics will produce contrary effects.


Chapter 39
Raj Yog

1-2. 0 excellent of the Brahmins, I now narrate below the Raj Yogas making one entitled to royal honour. These were told to Parvati by Lord Shiva once upon a time, the gist of which is as follows:

3-5. Raj Yogas are to be known from the Karakamsh Lagn and the natal Lagn. On the one hand the pair of Atma Karak and Putr Karak should be considered and on the other hand the natal Lagn's lord and Putr's lord should be taken into consideration. The effects due to such association will be full, or a half, or a quarter according to their strengths. (Karakamsh Lagn is the Navamsh occupied by the Atma Karak grah).

6-7. Maha Raj Yog: Should Lagn's Lord and Putr's lord exchange their rashis or if Atma Karak and Putr Karak (Char) are in Lagn, or in Putr Bhava, or in the exaltation rashi, or in own rashi, or in own Navamsh receiving a drishti from a benefic, Maha Raj Yog is produced. The native so born will be famous and happy.

8. If Lagn's lord and Atma Karak are in Tanu, Putr, or Yuvati Bhava yuti with or receiving a drishti from a benefic, a Raj Yog is formed.

9-10. Should there be benefics in the 2nd, the 4th, and the 5th counted either from Lagn's lord or from Atma Karak rashi, one will become a king. Similarly, malefics in the 3rd and 6th from Lagn's lord or from Atma Karak rashi will make one a king.

11. One will be related to royal circles if Shukr is the Karakamsh, or in the 5th there from, or in Lagn, or in Arudh Lagn receiving a drishti from, or yuti with Guru or Chandr.

12. Even if a single grah gives a drishti to the natal Lagn or Hora Lagn or Ghatik Lagn, the native will become a king.

13-14. If the six divisions (Shad Vargas) of Lagn are occupied or receive a drishti from one and the same grah, a Raj Yog is doubtlessly formed. Accordingly, if the drishti is full, half, or one fourth, results will be in order full, medium, and negligible.

15. If the 3 Lagnas (i.e. natal Lagn, Hora Lagn, and Ghatik Lagn) are occupied by grahas in exaltation or in own rashi, or if the natal Lagn, the Dreshkan Lagn, and the Navamsh Lagn have exalted grahas, Raj Yog is formed.

16. If Chandr and a benefic are in the Arudh Lang as Guru is in the 2nd from the natal Lagn and both these places are receiving drishtis from grahas in exaltation, or grahas in own rashi, there will be a Raj Yog.

17. If Lagn, Dhan, and Bandhu Bhava are occupied be benefics, while a malefic is in Sahaj Bhava, one will become a king or equal to a king.

18. The native will be wealthy if one among Chandr, Guru, Shukr, and Buddh is exalted in Dhan Bhava.

19. If Ari, Randhr, and Sahaj Bhava are occupied by debilitated grahas as Lagn's lord is exalted, or is in (his other) own Bhava, and gives a drishti to Lagn, there is a Raj Yog.

20. Again, a Raj Yog is formed if Ari's, Randhr's, and Vyaya's lords are in fall or in inimical rashis, or in combustion, as Lagn's lord placed in his (other) own rashi or in its exaltation rashi gives a drishti to Lagn.

21. If Karm's lord, placed in his own bhava, or in its exaltation rashi, gives a drishti to Lagn, a Raj Yog is formed. Similar is the case if benefics are in Kendras. (a Raj Yog is formed)

22. If the Atma Karak grah is in a benefic's Rashi/Navamsh, the native will be wealthy. If there are benefics in Kendras from Karakamsh Lagn, he will become a king.

23. If the Arudh Lagn and Dar Pad are in mutual Kendras or in mutual Sahaj/Labh bhavas, or in mutual Konas, the native will doubtlessly become a king.

24. If two or all of Bhava Lagn, Hora Lagn, Ghatik Lagn are receiving a drishti from exalted grahas, a Raj Yog is formed.

25. If Bhava Lagn, Hora Lagn, and Ghatik Lagn, their Dreshkanas and Navamshas, or the said Lagnas and their Navamshas, or the said Lagnas and their Dreshkanas receive a drishti from a grah, a Raj Yog is formed.

26-27. If Arudh Pad is occupied by an exalted grah particularly Chandr in exaltation, or by Guru and/or Shukr (with or without exaltation), while there is no Argala by a malefic, the native will become a king. If the Arudh Pad is a benefic rashi containing Chandr, while Guru is in Dhan Bhava the same effect will prevail.

28. Even if one among Ari's, Randhr's, and Vyaya's lords being in debilitation gives a drishti to Lagn, there will be a Raj Yog.

29-31. The native will become a king if a grah ruling Bandhu, Karm, Dhan, or Labh gives a drishti to Lagn, while Shukr gives a drishti to the 11th from Arudh Lagn as Arudh Lagn is occupied by a benefic. The same effect will be obtained if a debilitated grah gives a drishti to Lagn and is placed in Ari or Randhr Bhava. (i.e. The native will become a king) Again, similar result will prevail if a debilitated grah placed in Sahaj or Labh Bhava gives a drishti to Lagn. (i.e. The native will become a king)

32. I now tell you of the Raj Yogas based on the grahas with different dignities and on the drishtis and yutis of the grahas.

33-34. Dharm's lord is akin to a minister, and more especially Putr's lord. If these two grahas mutually give a drishti, the native will obtain a kingdom. Even if these two are yuti in any bhava, or if they happen to be placed in mutually 7th places, one born of royal scion will become a king. 

35. The native will attain a kingdom if Bandhu's lord is in Karm Bhava and Karm's lord is in Bandhu Bhava, and if these grahas give a drishti to Putr's and Dharm's lords.

36. If the lords of Putr, Karm, Bandhu, and Lagn are yuti in Dharm Bhava, one will become a ruler with fame spreading over the four directions.

37. Should the lord of Bandhu Bhava, or of Karm Bhava join either the Putr's lord or Dharm's lord, the native will obtain a kingdom.

38. If Putr's lord is in Lagn, Bandhu, or Karm Bhava yuti with Dharm's lord or Lagn lord, the native will become a king.

39. Should Guru be in his own rashi identical with Dharm Bhava and yuti with either Shukr or Putr's lord, the native will obtain royal status.

40. Two and a half ghatis (i.e. 60 minutes of time) from mid-day or from mid-night is auspicious time. A birth during such an auspicious time will cause one to be a king or equal to him.

41. Should Chandr and Shukr be mutually in Sahaj and Labh Bhava and receiving drishtis from each other while they are placed elsewhere (i.e. not in Sahaj and Labh Bhava), a Raj Yog is obtained.

42. Should Chandr, endowed with strength, be Vargottamsh and receives a drishti from four or more grahas, the native will become a king.

43. One will become a king if Lagn in Uttamamsh receives a drishti from four or more grahas out of which Chandr should not be one.

44. If one or two or three grahas are in exaltation, one of a royal scion will become a king, while another will be equal to a king or be wealthy.

45. If four or five grahas occupy their exaltation rashis or Mooltrikon rashis, even a person of base birth will become king.

46. If six grahas are exalted, the native will become emperor and will enjoy various kinds of royal paraphernalia.

47. Even if one among Guru, Shukr, and Buddh is in exaltation, while a benefic is in a Kendr the native will become a king or be equal to him.

48. If all benefics are relegated to Kendras, while malefics are in Sahaj, Ari, and Labh Bhava, the native, though may be of mean descent will ascend, the throne. 


Chapter 40
Yogas For Royal Association

1. If Karm's lord is yuti with or receives a drishti from the dispositor of Amatya Karak, or even if Karm's lord is yuti with or receives a drishti form Amatya Karak himself, the native will be a chief in the kings court.

2. If Karm and Labh Bhava are devoid of malefic occupation and devoid of drishti from a malefic, while Labh Bhava receives a drishti from its own lord, the native will be a chief in the king's court.

3. Should Amatya Karak and the dispositor of Atma Karak be together the native will be endowed with great intelligence and will be a king's minister. ('Karakendr' is interpreted here as the dispositor of Atma Karak. Similarly, 'Amatyesa' means the dispositor of Amatya Karak).

4. If Atma Karak is strong and is with a benefic or Amatya Karak is in its own Bhava or in exaltation, one will surely become a king's minister.

5. There is no doubt in one's becoming a king's minister and famous if Atma Karak is in Tanu, or Putr, or Dharm Bhava.

6. If Atma Karak or Amatya Karak is placed in a Kendr or in a Kon the native will beget royal mercy, royal patronage, and happiness there of.

7. Should malefics be in the 3rd and the 6th from Atma Karak, or from Arudh Lagn, or in Sahaj and Ari Bhava, one will become army chief.

8. If Atma Karak is in a Kendr, or in a Kon, or in exaltation, or in its own bhava, and gives a drishti to Dharm's lord, the native will be a king's minister.

9. If the lord of the rashi where Chandr is placed becomes Atma Karak and if this lord is placed in Tanu Bhava along with a benefic, the native will become a king's minister at his advanced age. 

10. Should the Atma Karak be in Putr, Yuvati, Karm, or Dharm Bhava and happen to be with a benefic, one will earn wealth through royal patronage.

11. If the Arudh of Dharm Bhava happens to be itself the Janm Lagn, or if Atma Karak is placed in Dharm Bhava the native will be associated with royal circles.

12. One will gain through royal association if Labh Bhava is occupied by its own lord, and is devoid of a drishti from a malefic. The Atma Karak should at the same time be yuti with a benefic.

13. An exchange of rashis between Karm's lord and Lagn's lord will make the native associated with the king in a great manner.

14. If Shukr and Chandr are in the 4th from Karakamsh Lagn, the native will be endowed with royal insignia.

15. Should Lagn's lord, or the Atma Karak, be yuti with Putr's lord and be in a Kendr or in a Kon, the native will be a king or minister.


Chapter 41
Combinations For Wealth

1. I now tell you of special combinations giving wealth. One born to these Yogas will surely become wealthy.

2. Yogas for Great Affluence (up to sloka 8): Should a rashi of Shukr be Putr Bhava and be occupied by Shukr himself, while Mangal is in Labh Bhava, the native will obtain great riches.

3. Should a rashi of Buddh be Putr Bhava and be occupied by Buddh himself as Labh Bhava is occupied by Chandr, Mangal, and Guru, the native will be very affluent.

4. Should Simh be Putr Bhava and be occupied by Surya himself as Shani, Chandr, and Guru are in Labh Bhava, the native will be very affluent.

5. Should Surya and Chandr be in Labh Bhava as Shani is in Putr Bhava identical with his own bhava, the native will be very affluent.

6. Should Guru be in Putr Bhava identical with his own rashi as Buddh is in Labh Bhava, the native will be very affluent.

7. If a rashi of Mangal happens to be Putr Bhava with Mangal there in while Shukr is in Labh Bhava, the native will become very affluent.

8. If Kark happens to be Putr Bhava containing Chandr there in, while Shani is in Labh Bhava, the native will become very affluent.

9. Yogas for Wealth (up to sloka 15): Should Surya be in Simh identical with Lagn, and be yuti with or receiving a drishti from Mangal and Guru, one will be wealthy.

10. Should Chandr be in Kark identical with Lagn, and be yuti with or receiving a drishti from Buddh and Guru one will be wealthy.

11. Should Mangal be in Lagn identical with his own rashi and be yuti with or receiving a drishti from Buddh, Shukr, and Shani, the native will be rich.

12. Should Buddh's rashi be Lagn with Buddh there in and should Buddh be yuti with or receiving a drishti from Shani and Guru the native will be rich.

13. Should Guru be in Lagn identical with as own rashi and be yuti with or receiving a drishti from Buddh and Mangal, the native will be rich.

14. If Shukr happens to be in Lagn identical with his own rashi and be yuti with or receiving a drishti from Shani and Buddh, one will be wealthy.

15. If Shani is in his own rashi identical with Lagn and receiving a drishti from or being yuti with Mangal and Guru, the native will be wealthy.

16. Other Qualified Grahas: Dharm's lord and Putr's lord are capable of bestowing wealth. Similarly, grahas yuti with Dharm's lord and/or Putr's lord are capable of bestowing wealth. There is no doubt that these grahas will give wealth during their Dasha periods.

17. The Yogas mentioned above (up to sloka 16) should be delineated after knowing favourable or unfavourable dispositions of the participant grahas and their strength and weakness.

18-19. Effects of the Divisional Dignities of the Lords of Kendras: If the lord of a Kendr is in Parijatamsh, the native will be liberal, if the lord of a Kendr is in Uttamamsh the native will be highly liberal, if the lord of a Kendr is in Gopuramsh the native will be endowed with prowess, if the lord of a Kendr is in Simhasanamsh the native will be honourable, (prominent, etc.), if the lord of a Kendr is in Paravatamsh the native will be valorous, if the lord of a Kendr is in Devalokamsh the native will be head of an assembly, if the lord of a Kendr is in Brahmalokamsh the native will be a sage, and if the lord of Kendr is in Iravatamsh the native will be delighted and be celebrated in all quarters.

20-22. Effects of the Divisional Dignities of Putr's Lord: If Putr's lord is in Parijatamsh, the native will take to the branch of learning befitting his race; if Putr's lord is in Uttamamsh the native will have excellent learning; if Putr's lord is in Gopuramsh the native will receive world-wide honours; if Putr's lord is in Simhasanamsh the native will become a minister; if Putr's lord is in also Paravatamsh the native will be endowed with Vedic Knowledge; if Putr's lord is in Devalokamsh the native will be a Karm Yogi (i.e. a performer of actions, worldly and religious rites); if Putr's lord is in Brahmalokamsh the native will be devoted to the Lord; and if Putr's lord is in Iravatamsh the native will be pious.

Notes: While the lords of the four Kendras are treated in one and the same breath, Maharishi Parashar gives special importance to Putr's and Dharm's lords individually. The effects may suitably be understood based on the explanations given above for the lords of Kendras.

23-27. Effects of the Divisional Dignities of Dharm's Lord: If Dharm's lord is in Parijatamsh, the native will visit holy places; if Dharm's lord is in Uttamamsh, the native has been visiting holy places in the past births and he will do the same within this life-time; if Dharm's lord is in Gopuramsh the native will perform sacrificial rites; if Dharm's lord is in Simhasanamsh the native will be mighty and truthful; he will be a conquerer of his senses and will concentrate only on the Brahman, giving up all religions; if Dharm's lord is in Paravatamsh the native will be the greatest of ascetics; if Dharm's lord is in Devalokamsh the native will be an ascetic holding a cudgel ('lagudi'), or he will be a religious mendicant that has renounced all mundane attachments and carrying three long staves tied together in his right hand ('Tridandin'); and if Dharm's lord is in Brahmalokamsh the native will perform Aswamedh Yagya (Horse Sacrifice) and will attain the state of Lord Indra. If Dharm's lord is in Iravatamsh the native will be a synonym of Dharma or virtues just as Lord Ram and Yudhishtira (the eldest of Pandavas).

28. Lords of Kendras and Konas Related: The Kendras are known as Vishnu Sthanas (i.e. Bhavas of Lord Vishnu), while the Konas are called Lakshmi Sthanas (i.e. Bhavas of Lakshmi). If the lord of a Kendr establishes a relationship with the lord of a Kon, a Raj Yog is obtained. (A sixth kind of relationship can also be extended in this context to Navamsh positions though there is no specific classic sanction for this. For example in the case of a Makar native, Mangal in the Navamsh of Shukr, and Shukr in the Navamsh of Mangal will confer a superior Raj Yog. This form of relationship will be equally superior like the first 3 relationships mentioned in the earlier paragraph).

29-34 Effects of the Divisional Dignities of Related Lords of Kendras and Lords of Konas (as indicated in sloka 28): If the lord of a Kendr and the lord of a Kon, having a relationship as indicated in sloka 28, happen to be in Parijatamsh, the native will be king and will protect men; if the lord of a Kendr and the lord of a Kon, having a relationship as indicated in sloka 28, happen to be in Uttamamsh, the native will be an excellent king endowed with elephants, horses, chariots, etc.; if the lord of a Kendr and the lord of a Kon, having a relationship as indicated in sloka 28, happen to be in Gopuramsh, the native will be a tiger of kings honoured by other kings; and if the lord of a Kendr and the lord of a Kon, having a relationship as indicated in slokas 28, happen to be in Simhasanamsh the native will be an emperor ruling over the entire earth; with the said Raj Yog relationship of the said grahas in Simhasanamsh were born Harish Chandr, Manu, Bali, the Fire god (Agni Deva) and many emperors. In the present Yuga so born is Yudhishtira (or Dharm Raj of Mahabharat). Salivahana's birth and that of others will also come with this Yog. With the lord of a Kendr and the lord of a Kon, having a relationship as indicated in sloka 28, placed in Paravatamsh, Manu, etc., were born. The Incarnations of Lord Vishnu took place when the lord of a Kendr and the lord of a Kon, having a relationship as indicated in sloka 28, were placed in Devalokamsh; with the lord of a Kendr and the lord of a Kon, having a relationship as indicated in sloka 28, placed in Brahmalokamsh Lord Brahma was born; and with the lord of a Kendr and the lord of a Kon, having a relationship as indicated in sloka 28, placed in Iravatamsh the Swayambhu Manu was born. (Manu is the first of the 14 Manus, identified as the second creator who produced the Prajapatis. To Manu, the code of laws, viz. Manu Smriti is ascribed).


Chapter 42
Combinations for Penury

1. O Lord, you have stated many Yogas related to acquisition of wealth. Please tell me such Yogas causing utter poverty.

2. The native will be penniless if Lagn's lord is in Vyaya Bhava, while Vyaya's lord is in Lagn along with the lord of a Marak (a death inflicting grah) or receives a drishti from such a grah.

3. The native will be penniless if Lagn's lord is in Ari Bhava, while Ari's lord is in Lagn, yuti with or receiving a drishti from a Marak lord.

4. Should Lagn or Chandr be with Ketu, while Lagn's lord is in Randhr Bhava, the person concerned will be penniless.

5. If Lagn's lord along with a malefic is in Ari, Randhr, or Vyaya Bhava, while Dhan's lord is in an enemy's rashi, or in debilitation, even a native of royal scion will become penniless.

6. If Lagn's lord is yuti with the lord of Ari, Randhr, or Vyaya Bhava, or with Shani, and if Lagn's lord is devoid of a drishti from a benefic the native will be penniless.

7. Should Putr's and Dharm's lords be respectively found in Ari and Vyaya Bhava, and receive a drishti from Marak grahas, the native will be penniless.

8. If malefics, excepting the lords of Karm and Dharm Bhava, happen to be in Lagn associated with or receiving a drishti from Marak grahas one will become penniless.

9. Note the grahas that are ruling the rashis occupied by the lords of Ari, Randhr, and Vyaya Bhava. If the said dispositors are in such evil bhavas in turn, and are associated with or receive a drishti from malefics, the native will be miserable and indigent.

10. The lord of the Navamsh occupied by Chandr, joining a Marak grah or occupying a Marak Bhava will make one penniless.

11. Should the lord of the natal Lagn and that of the Navamsh Lagn be yuti with or receive a drishti from Marak grahas, one will be penniless.

12. If inauspicious bhavas are occupied by benefics, while auspicious bhavas are occupied by malefics, the native will be indigent and will be distressed even in the matter of food.

13. A grah associated with one of the lords of Ari, Randhr, and Vyaya Bhava, being bereft of a drishti from the lord of a Kon, will in its Dasha periods cause harm to the native's financial aspects.

14. If the 8th/12th from Atma Karak, or Randhr/Vyaya Bhava receive a drishti from the Atma Karak's Navamsh lord and the lord of Janma Lagn, the native will be bereft of wealth.

15. The native will be a spend thrift if the 12th from Atma Karak receives a drishti from the dispositor of Atma Karak or if Vyaya Bhava receives a drishti from the lord of Lagn.

16-18. Now I tell you some Yogas for poverty along with conditions of their nullifications. Should Mangal and Shani be together in Dhan Bhava, the native's wealth will be destroyed. Should Buddh give a drishti to Mangal and Shani in Dhan Bhava, there will be great wealth. There is no doubt in it. Surya in Dhan Bhava receiving a drishti from Shani will cause penury; while if Surya is in Dhan Bhava and does not receive a drishti from Shani, riches and fame will be obtained. The same effects (i.e. poverty) will be declared if Shani is in Dhan Bhava receiving a drishti from Surya.


Chapter 43
Longevity

1. O Maharishi Parashar, you have dealt with combinations for wealth and poverty. Kindly detail methods of ascertaining the life span of human beings.

2-3. 0 Brahmin, for the benefit of mankind I narrate methods of ascertaining longevity; knowing that longevity is difficult even for gods. Many exponents have laid down various methods of longevity calculations. Following is the summary of such schools of thoughts.

4-8. Pindayu: The grahas contribute to longevity according to their being in exaltation, or debilitation, and also based on their strengths and weaknesses and positions in Ashvini, etc., and in the various rashis. First of all, Pindayu is based on the positions of the grahas. O Brahmin, listen carefully to what I say: 19, 25, 15, 12, 15, 21, and 20 are the number of years contributed by the grahas from Surya, etc., when in (deep) exaltation. These are half of the above in (deep) debilitation; and if the grahas are in between exaltation and debilitation, the rule of three process should be used. Deduct the actual position of the grah from its deep exaltation point. If the product is less than 6 rashis, deduct it again from 12 rashis. The product concerned should be multiplied by the number of years allotted to the grah and divided by 12 to get the grah's actual contribution.

9. Rectifications: Excepting Shukr and Shani, the contributions made by others should be halved, if they are eclipsed, by Surya. One third should be reduced if the grah is in its inimical rashi. This does not apply to the one in retrogression (see Vakra Charam).

10-11. Deductions for Grahas in the Visible Half of the Zodiac: Full, half, one third, one fourth, one fifth, and one sixth are the deductions of contributions made by malefics placed in the visible half of the zodiac. Benefics in such cases lose only half of what malefics lose. Should there be more than one grah in a bhava, the deduction due to the strongest will only prevail, and not deductions due to other grahas in that particular bhava. Waning Chandr is a benefic for this purpose.

12-13. Malefics in Lagn: In case Tanu Bhava is occupied by malefics, adopt the following procedure: Convert Lagn's Sphuta into minutes of arc and multiple it by the years, etc., contributed by the occupant and divide by 21600. The years etc. so arrived be deducted from the respective contribution which will be the net span donated by the grah. If there is benefics drishti on Lagn containing malefics then the loss is only half (obtained through these calculations).

14-15. Lagn's Contribution: The number of years contributed by Lagn will correspond to the number of rashis it gained (from Mesh), while the degrees Lagn has gained in the particular rashi will also correspondingly donate (i.e. 30 degrees=l year). If the Lagn's lord in the Navamsh is stronger than Lagn's lord, then the contribution should be computed only based on the number of Navamshas gained (from Mesh), otherwise the computation will be for the Rashi Lagn.

16-17. Nisargayu: O Brahmin, now I tell you about Nisargayu 1, 2, 9, 20, 18, 20,and 50 are the years allotted to Chandr, Mangal, Buddh, Shukr, Guru, Surya, and Shani from the period of birth. 

18-19. Amshayu: Now, I will tell you about Amshayu contributions by Lagn and grahas. The years correspond to the number of Navamshas counted from Mesh. Multiply the longitude in question by 108. If the product exceeds 12, expunge multiples of 12 and consider the final product in rashis, degrees, etc., as years, months, etc.

20-22. The same reductions as per Pindayu apply to Amshayu as well; i.e. half for a combust grah, one third for inimical placement and the ones due for placements in the half of the zodiac counted from the 12th backwards. Some scholars suggest further corrections for Amshayu, viz. To increase three fold the contribution of a grah in exaltation or in own bhava and double the contribution if the contributor is in his own Navamsh or in his own Dreshkan. If doubling and trebling is warranted, only trebling be done. In case of reductions also, only halving is to be done if both halving and reducing a third are required. That is how the final life span of men be understood.

23. Longevity for Other Living Beings: For other living beings as well such computations can be made. The said figure should be multiplied by the figure corresponding to its full span of life and divided by the figure corresponding to the full span of life for human beings.

24-29. Full Life Span of Various Living Beings: Now, I'll tell you about the full life span figures for various living beings. Gods and sages enjoy endless life span (i.e. in astronomical proportions as against ordinary mortals). The full life span of eagles, owls, parrots, crows, and snakes is one thousand years. For falcon, monkey, bear, and frog the full span of life is 300 years. Demon's full life span is 150 years, while it is 120 years for human beings. 32 years for horses. 25 years for donkeys and camels, 24 years for oxen and buffaloes, 20 years for peacocks, 16 years for goats and rams. 14 years for swans, 12 years for cuckoo, dog, and dove, 8 years for hens, etc., and 7 years for birds, etc.

30-31. Choice of Longevity: I have narrated 3 different methods of longevity. Listen to me about the choice among the three systems. According to which of the three: Lagn, Surya, or Chandr is stronger than the other two, Amshayu, Pindayu, or Nisargayu should be respectively chosen.

32. Doubtful Cases: If two among Lagn, Surya, and Chandr gain equal strength, then longevity should be worked out as per both systems and the average of both (final) should be considered. If all the three are equally strong, the average of the three should be considered.

33-40. Other Clues to Longevity: O excellent of the Brahmins, I will now give you details of other methods in the matter of longevity as under: This is based on the positions of Lagn's lord, Randhr's lord, Shani, Chandr, natal Lagn, and Hora Lagn. These six are grouped into three groups, thus: the lords of Lagn and of Randhr Bhava on the one hand, Shani and Chandr on the other hand, and the natal Lagn and Hora Lagn on yet the other hand. Out of a group of two, if the two are in movable rashis long life is denoted. One in a fixed rashi and the other in a dual rashi will also bestow long life. One in a movable rashi and the other in a fixed rashi will give medium life. If both are in dual rashis then, again medium life will be obtained. Short life is denoted if one is in a movable rashi as the other is in a dual rashi, or if both are in fixed rashis. The type of life denoted by three or two groups be only considered. If the three groups denote different scales, then the one indicated by the pair of natal Lagn and Hora Lagn should be only considered. In case of three different indications if Chandr is in Lagn or Yuvati Bhava, then, the one indicated by the Shani-Chandr pair will only come to pass.

41-44. Further Clarifications: If long life is denoted by all the said three groups, the span is 120 years, if by two groups it is 108 years, and if only by one group it is 91 years. If medium life is arrived at by three groups it is 80 years, if medium life span is indicated by 2 groups it is 72 years, and if medium life span is indicated by one group it is 64 years. If short life is denoted by the said three groups it is only 32 years, if short life is indicated by two groups, the life span is 36 years, and if short life is indicated by one group the life span is 40 years. These are rectified as under.

45-46. Rectifications: If the contributor is in the beginning of a rashi, his donation will be full, and it will be nil if he is at the end of a rashi. For intermediary placements, rule of the process will apply. Add the longitudes of the contributors (devoid of rashis) and the sum so arrived at must be divided by the number of contributors. The latest product should be multiplied by the number of basic years and divided by 30. This will yield the net longevity.

47. Special Rule for Shani: Should Shani be a contributor, the class of longevity declines. Some advocate contrarily, an increase of class in this context. If Shani is in its own rashi or in exaltation, change in class will not occur. Even if he receives a drishti from or is yuti with only a malefic, no change occurs.

48. Special Rule for Guru: If Guru is in Lagn or in Yuvati Bhava, and receives a drishti from or is yuti with only benefics, the class of longevity will increase.

49-50. Increase and Fall in Class of Longevity: From very short life to short life, from short life to medium life, from medium life to long life and from long life to extremely long life are the increases in the classification of longevity when Guru warrants an increase. The reverse is true if Shani warrants a fall in the span of life.

51. (Maitreya says): You have narrated various kinds of longevity computations. Please favour me by denoting subtle classes there of and poor and long life spans.

52. (Maharishi Parashar replies): These are seven-fold, viz. Bal Risht, Yog Risht, short, medium, long, super-natural (Divya), and immortality (Amritayu).

53-54. The life span in Bal Risht is 8 years, in Yog Risht 20 years; in short, medium, and long lives respectively 32, 64, and 120 years. Super-natural life span is 1000 years. Above this super-natural life span of 1000 years it is Amritayu, which can be acquired only by those who deserve it (Merits).

55. Limitless Longevity: Should Kark be Lagn with Guru and Chandr there in, while Shukr and Buddh are in Kendras, and others are in Sahaj, Ari, and Labh Bhava, the native will obtain limitless longevity.

56. Super-natural Longevity: One having benefics in Kendras and/or Konas, while malefics are in Sahaj, Ari, and Labh Bhava will obtain super-natural life span (one thousand years). Randhr Bhava in this case should be one of the rashis owned by a benefic.

57. Living until the End of the Yuga: One born in Kark Lagn will live till the end of the yuga if Guru is in a Kendr and happens to be in Gopuramsh, while Shukr is in a Kon and happens to be in Paravatamsh.

58. Living the Life Span of a Sage: Guru in Simhasanamsh being in Lagn, Shani in Devalokamsh, and Mangal in Paravatamsh; if these are so, one will enjoy the life span as due to a sage.

59. Good Yogas increase the life span and bad Yogas decrease the same (as arrived by mathematical means). Hence, I tell you such Yogas as to know of full, medium, and short span combinations.

60. If a Kendr contains a benefic, while Lagn's lord is yuti with or receives a drishti from a benefic, or Guru in particular, the native will live a full span of life.

61. Should Lagn's lord be in a Kendr yuti with or receiving a drishti from Guru and Shukr, full life span will result.

62. If at birth three grahas are exalted, out of which the lords, of Lagn and Randhr Bhava are inclusive, as Randhr Bhava is devoid of a malefic in it, full life span will result.

63. Long life is denoted if three grahas are in Randhr Bhava, in exaltation, own or friendly divisions, while Lagn's lord is strong.

64. If Shani or Lagn's lord is yuti with any exalted grah, long life will result.

65. Long life will be enjoyed if malefics are in Sahaj, Ari, and Labh Bhava, while benefics are in Kendras.

66. If Ari, Yuvati, and Randhr Bhava are occupied by benefics, while malefics are in Sahaj and Labh Bhava, full life span will follow the birth.

67. If Randhr's lord is friendly to Surya, while malefics are in Ari and Vyaya Bhava, as Lagn's lord is in a Kendr, the native will live the full span of life.

68. 0 excellent of the Brahmins, if a malefic is in Randhr Bhava, while Karm's lord is exalted, one will be long lived.

69. Long life will follow if Lagn is a dual rashi, while Lagn's lord is in a Kendr, or in exaltation, or in a Kon.

70. Should Lagn be a dual rashi, while two malefics are in a Kendr with reference to a strong Lagn's lord, long life is indicated.

71-73. If the stronger among Lagn's lord and Randhr's lord is placed in a Kendr long life is indicated; and if in a Panaphara (Dhan, Putr, Randhr, or Labh Bhava) medium life is indicated; If the stronger among Lagn's lord and Randhr's lord is placed in Apoklima (Sahaj, Ari, Dharm, or Vyaya Bhava) short life will come to pass. According to Lagn's lord being friendly, neutral, or inimical to Surya, long, medium, or short life will result.

74. Should Mangal and Sahaj's lord, or Randhr's lord and Shani, be combust or (two of either pair) be yuti with malefics or receive a drishti from malefics, there will be short life.

75. If Lagn's lord is in Ari, Randhr, or Vyaya Bhava yuti with malefics and devoid of yuti with and/or drishti from a benefic, short life will come to pass.

76. If malefics are in Kendras devoid of yuti with or a drishti from benefics, while Lagn's lord is not strong, only short life will result.

77. 0 excellent of Brahmins, if Vyaya and Dhan Bhava are occupied by malefics and devoid of a drishti from a benefic or devoid of yuti with a benefic, the native will be short-lived.

78. If the lords of Lagn and Randhr Bhava are bereft of dignities and strength, short life will come to pass. If the lords of Lagn and Randhr Bhava are helped by others, while being so, medium life span will come to pass.


Chapter 44
Marak (Killer) Grahas

1. O Maharishi Parashar, you have mentioned a lot about longevity. Be kind enough to throw light on Marakas or killers.

2-4. 0 Brahmin, Sahaj and Randhr Bhava are the two bhavas of longevity. The bhavas related to death are the 12th from each of these, i.e. Dhan and Yuvati Bhava are Marak Bhavas.

5. Out of the two (i.e. Dhan and Yuvati Bhava), Dhan Bhava is a powerful Marak Bhava (as against Yuvati Bhava). The lords of Dhan and Yuvati Bhava, malefics in Dhan and Yuvati Bhava, and malefics yuti with Dhan's lord and yuti with Yuvati's lord, are all known as Marakas. The major and sub periods of these grahas will bring death on the native depending on whether he has a long life, medium life, or short life person.

6-7. The Dasha of a benefic grah related to Vyaya's lord may also inflict death. End may descend on the native in Randhr's lord's Dasha. The Dasha of a grah which is an exclusive malefic (i.e. first-rate malefic) may also cause death.

9. Should Shani be ill-disposed and be related to a Marak grah, he will be the first to kill in preference to other grahas.

10-14. 0 Brahmin, I tell you further about Marakas. Narrated earlier are three kinds of life spans, viz. short, medium, and long. Short life is before 32 years, later on up to 64 it is medium life, and from 64 to 100 it is long life. Beyond 100 the longevity is called supreme. O excellent of the Brahmins, it is impossible to decide upon longevity till the native is 20 years old. Till such year the child should be protected by sacred recitations, religious offerings (of ghee, etc., to consecrated fire as prescribed in the Vedas, etc., and through medical treatments, for premature death may descend on the child due to sins of father and mother or of its own (in the previous birth).

15-21. I further mention about the Marak grahas. One born with short life combinations may face death in the Dasha denoted by Vipat star (the 3rd from the birth star); one of medium life may die in the Dasha denoted by Pratyak star (the 5th from the birth star). In the Dasha denoted by Vadh star (the 7th from the birth star), one with long life may obtain his end. The Dasha of the lord of the 22nd Dreshkan, or the Dasha of the lord of the 23rd, or the Dasha of the lord of the 3rd, or the Dasha of the lord of the 5th, or the Dasha of the lord of the 7th asterisms may also cause death. The lords of the 2nd and the 12th counted from Kark may bring death, this is true when Chandr is a malefic; if he happens to be a benefic there will be (only) diseases (but not death). Death may come to pass in the Dasha of Ari's lord and in the sub periods of Ari's, Randhr's, and/or Vyaya's lords. Should there be many Marakas (endowed with the power of killing),and if these Marakas are strong, there will be diseases, miseries, etc., in major and sub periods. Thus, these are Marakas (as is mentioned above) and are primarily related to bring death upon the native. According to their dispositions there may be death or difficulties.

22-24. Rahu and Ketu as Marakas: If Rahu or Ketu are placed in Tanu, Yuvati, Randhr, or Vyaya Bhava, or happen to be in the 7th from a Marak lord, or are placed with such a grah, they acquire powers of killing in their major or sub periods. For one born in Makar, or in Vrischik, Rahu will be a Marak. Should Rahu be in Ari, Randhr, or Vyaya Bhava, he will give difficulties in his Dasha periods. He will not, however, do so if Rahu receives a drishti from, or is yuti with a benefic.

25-31. Sahaj Bhava and Death: O excellent of Brahmins, if Surya, being with strength, is in Sahaj Bhava, one will obtain his death due to a king (or legal punishments); Chandr in Sahaj Bhava will cause death due to tuberculosis, while wounds, weapons, fire, and thirst will cause death through Mangal in Sahaj Bhava. If Sahaj Bhava receives a drishti from, or is occupied by Shani and Rahu, death will be through poison, water, or fire, or fall from heights, or confinement. Death will surely come to descend through insects or leprosy if Chandr and Gulik occupy or give a drishti to Sahaj Bhava. Buddh giving a drishti to or occupying Sahaj Bhava will bring death followed by fever. Guru in Sahaj Bhava or giving a drishti to Sahaj Bhava will cause death by swelling or tumours. Urinary diseases will cause death if Shukr is in, or gives a drishti to Sahaj Bhava. Many grahas giving a drishti to or occupying Sahaj Bhava will bring death through many diseases.

32. If Sahaj Bhava is occupied by a benefic, death will be in an auspicious place (like a shrine); and if Sahaj Bhava is occupied by a malefic death will be in sinful places. Mixed occupation of Sahaj Bhava will yield mixed results with regard to the place of death.

33. Consciousness will prevail at the time of death if Guru or Shukr are placed in Sahaj Bhava. With other grahas in Sahaj Bhava, there will be unconsciousness before death.

34. According to Sahaj Bhava being a movable, a fixed, or a dual rashi, death will be respectively in a foreign place (other than native birth place), in one's own house, or on the way. 

35-36: Occupants of Randhr Bhava: Note the occupant of Randhr Bhava: If it is Surya, death will be through fire; if Chandr is in Randhr Bhava, death will be through water; if Mangal is in Randhr Bhava, death will be through weapons; if Buddh is in Randhr Bhava, death will be through fever; if Guru is in Randhr Bhava, death will be through diseases; if Shukr is in Randhr Bhava, death will be through hunger; and if Shani is in Randhr Bhava, death will be through thirst.

37. If Randhr Bhava is occupied by or receives a drishti from a benefic, while Dharm's lord is yuti with a benefic the native will die in a shrine. If Randhr Bhava is occupied by or receives a drishti from a malefic, while Dharm's lord is yuti with a malefic, death will be in a place other than a shrine.

38-39. Fate of the Human Physical System: Should there be a benefic's Dreshkan in Randhr Bhava (i.e. the 22nd Dreshkan), the body will be burnt in fire (as prescribed in Shastras); if a malefic's Dreshkan happens to be in Randhr Bhava, the body will be thrown away in water; if the Dreshkan in Randhr Bhava is owned by a mixed grah the dead body will only dry up; if the Dreshkan in Randhr Bhava is a serpent Dreshkan, the body will be eaten away by animals, crows, etc.;

40. Serpent Dreshkanas: The 2nd and 3rd Dreshkan in Kark, the initial one in Vrischik, and the last one in Meen are designated as serpent Dreshkanas.

41-42. Pre-natal Abode: O excellent of Brahmins, the stronger of the two luminaries, Surya and Chandr, occupying a Dreshkan of Guru denotes the descent from the world of gods. If the stronger of the luminaries, Surya and Chandr, occupies the Dreshkan of Shukr or Chandr, the descent is from the world of the Manes; if the stronger of the two luminaries, Surya and Chandr, is in the Dreshkan of Surya or Mangal, the descent is from the world of Yama (the world of the death); and if the stronger of the two luminaries, Surya and Chandr, is in Dreshkan of Buddh or Shani, the descent is from the hell.

43-45. Ascent after Death: According to the following grahas in Vyaya, Yuvati, Ari, or Randhr Bhava, the native will attain one of the different worlds after death: Guru: heaven; Chandr or Shukr: the world of Manes; Mangal and/or Surya: earth (i.e. rebirth); Buddh and/or Shani: hell. In case the said bhavas are not occupied, the native will go to the world indicated by the stronger of the Dreshkan lords related to Ari and Randhr Bhava. The relative grah's exaltation, etc., will denote the high, medium, and low status the native will obtain in the said world. world of Yama (the world of the death); and if the stronger of the two luminaries, Surya and Chandr, is in Dreshkan of Buddh or Shani, the descent is from the hell

46. Other grahas and rashis becoming Marakas are being discussed in the chapter related to Dashas. 


Chapter 45
Avasthas of Grahas

1. O Maharishi Parashar, you have earlier stated that the Avasthas, or states, of the grahas are to be considered in the context of the effects of the grahas. Be so kind to tell me about this.

2. 0 excellent of Brahmins, various kinds of Avasthas of the grahas have been expounded. Out of these, I will give you the summary of Baal (infant) and other states of the grahas (in the first instance).

3. Baal, Kumar, Yuv, Vriddh, and Mrit Avastha: Infant, youthful, adolescent, old, and dead are the states of the grahas placed in the ascending order at the rate of six degrees in odd rashis. In the case of even rashis this arrangement is in reverse order. (These five Avasthas are known as Baal Adi Avasthas. For odd rashis, the placement concerned will denote the Avastha as under: Baal Avastha (Infant state): O to 6 degrees Kumar Avastha (Youthful state): 6 to 12 degrees Yuv Avastha (Adolescent state): 12 to 18 degrees Vriddh Avastha (Advanced state): 18 to 24 degrees Mrit Avastha (In extremis): 24 to 30 degrees The above order is to be reversed for placement in an even rashi).

4. Results: One fourth, half, full, negligible, and nil are the grades of the results due to a grah in infant, youthful, adolescent, old, and dead Avasthas.

5. Awakening, Dreaming, and Sleeping States: If a grah is in its own rashi, or in exaltation it is said to be in a state of awakening (or alertness). In the rashi of a friend or of a neutral rashi, it is in dreaming state, while in an enemy's rashi, or in debilitation it is in a state of sleeping.

6. According to a grah being in Awakening, Dreaming or Sleeping states, the results due to it will be full, medium, or nil.

7. Other Kinds of States: There are nine kinds of other Avasthas, viz. Dipt, Swasth, Pramudit, Shanta, Din, Vikal, Khal, and Kop.

8-10. If a grah is in its exaltation rashi, it is in Dipt Avastha; if a grah is in its own rashi, it is in Swasth Avastha, if a grah is in a great friend's rashi, it is in Pramudit Avastha; if a grah is in a friendly rashi, it is in Shanta Avastha; if a grah is in a neutral rashi, it is in Din Avastha; if a grah is yuti with a malefic, it is in Vikal Avastha; if a grah is in an enemy's rashi, it is in Duhkhit Avastha; if a grah is in a great enemy's rashi it is in Khal Avastha; and if a grah is being eclipsed by Surya, it is in Kop Avastha. Depending on such a state of the grah, the bhava occupied by it will obtain corresponding effects.

8. Yet Other Avasthas: Lajjit, Garvit, Kshudhit, Trushit, Mudit, and Kshobhit are the (six) other kinds of Avasthas due to the grahas. Placed in Putr Bhava, if a grah is associated with Rahu or Ketu, or with Surya, Shani, or Mangal, it is in Lajjit Avastha. If a grah is in exaltation or in Mooltrikon, it is Gavit Avastha. If a grah is in an enemy's rashi, or yuti with an enemy, or receives a drishti from an enemy, or even if a grah is yuti with Shani, the Avastha is Kshudhit. If a grah is in a watery rashi and receives a drishti from a malefic but does not receive a drishti from a benefic, the Avastha is called Trushit. If a grah is in a friendly rashi, or is yuti with, or receives a drishti from a benefic, or is yuti with Guru, it is said to be in Mudit Avastha. If a grah is yuti with Surya and receives a drishti from, or is yuti with a malefic, or receives a drishti from an enemy, it is said to be in Kshobhit Avastha. The bhavas occupied by a grah in Kshudhit Avastha or in Kshobhit Avastha are destroyed.

(OVDJE NESTO NEDOSTAJE!?)

19-23. The learned should estimate the effects due to a bhava in the manner cited above (i.e. with the help of various kinds of Avasthas), after ascertaining the strength and weakness (of the various grahas). Weak grahas cause reduction in good effects ,while stronger ones give greater effects. If a grah posited in Karm Bhava is in Lajjit Avastha, in Kshudhit Avastha, or in Kshobhit Avastha, the person will always be subjected to miseries. If a grah in Putr Bhava is in Lajjit Avastha, there will be destruction of progeny, or there will be only one surviving child. Surely the wife of the native will die if there is a grah in Yuvati Bhava in Kshobhit Avastha or in Trushit Avastha.

24-29. Effects of Garvit, Mudit, Lajjit, Kshobhit, Kshudhit, and Trushit Avastha: A grah in Garvit Avastha will cause happiness through new houses and gardens, regalhood, skill in arts, financial gains at all times, and improvement in business. A grah in Mudit Avastha will give residences, clothes, ornaments, happiness from lands and wife, happiness from relatives, living in royal places, destruction of enemies, and acquisition of wisdom and learning. A grah in Lajjit Avastha will give aversion to God, loss of intelligence, loss of child, interest in evil speeches, and listlessness in good things. A grah in Kshobhit Avastha will give acute penury, evil disposition, miseries, financial debacles, distress to feet and obstruction to income due to royal wrath. A grah in Kshudhit Avastha will cause downfall due to grief and passion, grief on account of relatives, physical decline, troubles from enemies, financial distress, loss of physical strength and an eclipsed mind due to miseries. A grah in Trushit Avastha will cause diseases through association with females, leading over wicked (or evil) deeds, loss of wealth due to ones own men, physical weakness, miseries caused by evil people, and decline of honour.

30-37. Calculation of Shayan and Other Avasthas: Now, I will tell you of the Avasthas viz. Shayan, Upavesan, Netrapani, Prakash, Gaman, Agaman, Sabh, Agam, Bhojan, Nritya Lips, Kautuk, and Nidr, and the Chesthas of such Avasthas. Note the number of the stars (from Ashvini) occupied by the grah for which an Avastha is to be calculated. Multiply that number by the number denoted by the grah (Surya 1, Chandr 2, Mangal 3, Buddh 4, Guru 5, Shukr 6, and Shani 7). The figure so arrived at should again be multiplied by the number of the Navamsh where the grah is in. Add to this the number of the birth asterism, the number of ghatis of birth, and the number of rashis Lagn gained from Mesh. This figure should be divided by 12 and the remainder will indicate the corresponding Avastha of the grah. The sub state in the said Avastha can be found out in the following way: Multiply the figure denoted by the Avastha concerned (i.e. Sayan 1, Upavesan 2, Netrapani 3, Prakash 4, Gaman 5, Agaman 6, Sabh 7, Agam 8, Bhojan 9, Nritya Lips 10, Kautuk 11, and Nidr 12) by the same figure and increase it by the figure denoted by the Anka value for the first syllable of the native's personal name. Divide the product so obtained by 12. The remainder there of should be further increased by constant additives of the Buddh 3, Guru 5, Shukr 3, Shani 3, Rahu 4 (and Ketu 4). (Here the grah means the one for whom the sub state is being known.) The product so arrived at should be divided by 3. In the process of calculation if it happens that the remainder is 1, it is Drishti, if the remainder is 2, it is Chesht, and if the remainder is 0, it is Vichesht.

Notes:
So far narrated are three different groups of Avasthas. The present Avasthas are called Shayan Adi Avasthas. These are of supreme importance as compared to the other kinds of Avasthas.. The following formula may be adopted to know about the grah's Avastha (Sayan Adi) at birth: (s x p x n) + (a + g + r) ------------------------- = Avastha 12 Where as 's' denotes the serial number of the star occupied by the grah, counted from Ashvini at birth; 'p' denotes the status of the grah counted from Surya (i.e. Surya 1, Chandr 2, Mangal 3, Buddh 4, Guru 5, Shukr 6, Shani 7); 'n' denotes the grah's Navamsh position (i.e. 1 to 9 Navamshas); 'a' denotes Janm Nakshatr (or ruling star, i.e. the one occupied by Chandr); 'g' denotes the ghati in which birth took place (i. e. 20 ghatis 2 vighatis is 21 ghatis); and 'r' denotes Lagn 's order counted from Mesh (i.e. Mesh 1, Vrishabh 2, Kark 4, Simh 5, and so on and so forth). In place of 'n' given above, some translators interpret the word 'Amsh' as degree occupied by the grah which is obviously not correct.
In this connection, the reader's attention is drawn to Balabhadr's Hora Ratna, ch 3 wherein the author Balabhadr himself gives an example for Surya being in the 7th Navamsh of Simh and thus he considered only 7 as multiplier. He has not taken in to account Surya's degree. He quotes Adhibhut Sagara as his authority for calculation of Sayan Adi Avasthas. It will thus be clear that Amsh is Navamsh and not degree in this context. Also please note that Agaman Avastha (the 6th one) is known as Gamanechch Avastha by some exponents. Take a case now as an example with the following data: Surya in Kritika Nakshatr, 3rd Navamsh of Vrishabh (i.e. in 7 degrees 12' Vrishabh), the birth star is Kritika, birth is at 30 ghatis 33 vighatis, and Lagn is in Vrischik. With these we produce the following information, keeping the formula given above. s = 3, p = 1, n = 3; a = 3, g = 31, r = 8. Hence to find out the Avastha, (3 x 1 x 3) + (3 + 31 + 8) 51 -+- ----------------------- ---- 12 12 With the help of remainder 3, we count three Avasthas from Sayan. This indicates Netrapani Avastha for Surya. Similarly, for 9 grahas, such Avasthas can be found out. In a given horoscope, the factors 'a', 'g', and 'r' will be identical for all the 9 grahas, while factors 's', 'p', and 'n' will be variable.
After knowing the Avasthas of various grahas, we have to find out the sub-state of each Avastha. The formula for knowing the sub-state is made in two stages, as under: Stage 1: (A x A) + fs ------------ = R 12 Stage 2: (R + pa) : 3 = sub-state of an Avastha Where 'A' is Avastha, 'f' is first syllable's value with reference to the native's personal name, R is remainder in stage 1, and 'pa' is the additives of the grah denoted in the above slokas, such as Surya 5, Shukr 3, etc.. The remainder at stage 2 will denote the sub-state such as 1 is Drishti, 2 is Chesht, and 0 is Vichesht. We need information about the Anka value, or value for the first syllable of the name of a person. This value is: 1 for a, ka, cha, da (retroflex), and va; 2 for i, kha, ja, da (dental), and sha; 3 for u, ga, jha, ta (dental), pa, ya, and sha; 4 for e, gha, ta (retroflex), tha (dental), pha, ra, and ma; 5 for o, ca, tha (retroflex), da (dental), and ha. Now with the above data, find the sub-state for Surya in Netrapani Avastha as per the example given supra. First syllable of the name is "Sa". Hence, (3 x 3) + 4 Stage 1: ---------- = Remainder 1 12 (1 + 5) Stage 2: ------- = 0 3 Remainder zero indicates sub-state as Vichesht, in Netrapani Avastha.

38-39. Effects of Chesht etc.: If the sub-state is Drishti in an Avastha, the results being stated for the Avastha will be medium; the effects will be full in Chesht, and negligible in Vichesht. The good and bad effects of grahas should be deciphered based on the strength and weakness of the grahas. In exaltation, the grahas reveal effects in a pronounced manner due to (good) Avasthas.

40-51. Effects of Surya's Avasthas at Birth: If Surya is in Sayan Avastha, the native will incur digestive deficiency, many diseases, stoutness of legs, bilious vitiation, ulcer in the anus, and heart strokes. If Surya is in Upavesan Avastha, the native will suffer poverty, will carry loads, will indulge in litigations, be hard-hearted, wicked, and will lose in his undertakings. If Surya is in Netrapani Avastha, the native will always be happy, wise, helpful to others, endowed with prowess, and wealth, very happy, and will gain royal favours. If Surya is in Prakash Avastha, the native will be liberal in disposition, will have plenty of wealth, will be a significant speaker in the assembly, will perform many meritorious acts, will be greatly strong, and will be endowed with charming beauty. If Surya is in Gaman Avastha the native will be disposed to live in foreign places; he will be miserable, indolent, bereft of intelligence and wealth; he will be distressed due to fear and he will be short-tempered. If Surya is in Agaman Avastha, the native will be interested in others' wives; he will be devoid of his own men, he will be interested in movements and skilful in doing evil deeds; he will be dirty, ill-disposed and he will be a tale bearer. If Surya is in Sabh Avastha, the native will be disposed to help others; he will be always endowed with wealth and gems; he will be virtuous, endowed with lands, new houses and robes; he will be very strong, very affectionate to his friends, and very kindly disposed. If Surya is in Agam Avastha, the native will be distressed due to enemies, fickle-minded, evil-minded, emaciated, devoid of virtuous acts and intoxicated with pride. If Surya is in Bhojan Avastha, the native will experience pains in joints; he will lose money on account of others' females, he will have strength declining off and on; he will be untruthful, will incur head-aches, will eat remnant food, and will take to bad ways. If Surya is in Nritya Lips Avastha, the native will be honoured by the learned; he will be a scholar, will have knowledge of poetry, etc., and he will be adored by kings on the earth. If Surya is in Kautuk Avastha, the native will always be happy; he will be endowed with Vedic Knowledge and he will perform Yagyas; he will move amidst kings, will have fear from enemies; he will be charming-faced and he will be endowed with knowledge of poetry. If Surya is in Nidr Avastha, the native will have a strong tendency towards being drowsy; he will live in foreign (or distant) places; he will incur harm to his wife and will face financial destruction. Surya in Upavesan Avastha will make one an artisan, black in complexion, devoid of learning and miserable. One will serve others. In Netrapani Avastha there will be all kinds of happiness, if Surya is in Putr, Dharm, Karm, or Yuvati Bhava. In other bhavas (i.e. not in Putr, Dharm, Karm, or Yuvati Bhava), Netrapani Avastha of Surya will give eye diseases and enmity with all. If Surya is in Prakash Avastha, the native will be meritorious, religious, and liberal; he will enjoy pleasures, will be equal to a prince, and will enjoy the status of Kuber, the God of wealth. However, the Prakash Avastha of Surya placed in Yuvati, or Putr Bhava will cause loss of the first child and will produce many litigations. If Surya is in Gaman Avastha, the native will incur disease of the feet and he will be very mean. If in Agaman Avastha, Surya in Vyaya or in Yuvati Bhava will destroy progeny and will give very limited wealth. If in Agam Avastha, Surya will give many miseries, an ugly appearance, and foolishness. However, he will give wealth. Surya in Bhojan Avastha in Dharm Bhava will cause many hindrances to spiritual and religious undertakings. In other bhavas (i.e. other than Dharm Bhava), Surya in Bhojan Avastha will cause head and ear diseases, apart from joint pains. Though Maharishi Parashar states that the native with Surya in Kautuk Avastha will have fear from enemies Bal Bhadr exempts such evil effect for the Ari Bhava position. Surya in Kautuk Avastha in other bhavas (i.e. not in Ari Bhava), will give a number of daughters, two wives, itch, excellence, liberality, etc.. If Surya is in Nidr Avastha, the native will be predisposed to incur piles and elephantiasis; he will experience a lack of peace; and he will be liable to lose his first child.

52-63. Effects of Chandr's Avasthas at Birth: If Chandr is in Sayan Avastha, the native will be honourable, sluggish, given to sexual lust, and he will face financial destruction. If Chandr is in Upavesan Avastha, the native will be troubled by diseases, he will be dull-witted, not endowed with mentionable wealth (i.e. will have only negligible wealth); he will be hard-hearted, will do unworthy acts, and will steal others' wealth. If Chandr is in Netrapani Avastha, the native will be troubled by great diseases (long lasting in nature), be very garrulous, wicked, and he will indulge in bad deeds. Should Chandr be in Prakash Avastha, the native will be famous in the world, he will have his virtues exposed through royal patronage; he will be surrounded by horses, elephants, females, and ornaments; he will visit shrines. If Chandr is in Gaman Avastha, with decreasing rays the native will be sinful, cruel, and always troubled by afflictions of sight; if Chandr is in Gaman Avastha with increasing rays, the native will be distressed due to fear. If Chandr is in Agaman Avastha, the native will be honourable; he will suffer diseases of the feet; he will secretly indulge in sinful acts; he will be poor and devoid of intelligence and happiness. If Chandr is in Sabh Avastha, the native will be eminent among men, honoured by kings, and kings of kings; he will be very beautiful, will subdue the passion of women and he will be skilful in sexual acts; he will be virtuous. If Chandr is in Agam Avastha, the native will be garrulous, and virtuous and if the said Chandr is of dark fortnight the native will have two wives; he will be sick, highly wicked, and he will be violent. If Chandr is in Bhojan Avastha, the native will be endowed with honour, conveyances, attendants, social status, wife and daughters, provided Chandr is Full 'Purna Chandr'; if Chandr is in Bhojan Avastha and is of dark fortnight auspicious effects (i.e. honour, conveyances, attendants, social status, wife and daughters) will fail to come. If Chandr is in Nritya Lips Avastha and is endowed with (fort nightly) strength, the native will be strong, he will have knowledge of songs, and he will be a critic of beauty of things. If Chandr is in Nritya Lips Avastha and of dark fortnight, i.e. not endowed with strength, the person will be sinful. If Chandr is in Kautuk Avastha, the native will attain kinship, lordship over wealth, and skill in sexual acts and in sporting with harlots. Should waxing Chandr being yuti with Guru be in Nidr Avastha, the native will be quite eminent. If waxing Chandr is in Nidr Avastha but devoid of Guru's yuti, the native will lose his wealth on account of females, and female jackals will be crying around his abode (as though it were a cemetery).

64-75. Effects of the Avasthas of Mangal at Birth: If Mangal is in Sayan Avastha, the native will be troubled by wounds, itch, and ulcer. If Mangal is placed in Upavesan Avastha,the native will be strong, sinful, untruthful, eminent, wealthy, and bereft of virtues. If Mangal is placed in Lagn and happen to be in Netrapani Avastha there will be penury; if Mangal is placed in other bhavas (i.e. in one of the bhavas other than Tanu Bhava), Netrapani Avastha will confer rulership of a city. Should Mangal be in Prakash Avastha, the native will shine with virtues and will be honoured by the king. Mangal in Prakash Avastha in Putr Bhava will, cause loss of children and of wife. If Mangal is in Prakash Avastha in Putr Bhava and happens to be there with Rahu, a severe (positional) fall will descend on the native. Should Mangal be in Gaman Avastha the native will be always roaming, will have fear of multiple ulcers, will incur misunderstandings with females, will be afflicted by boils, itches, etc., and will incur financial decline. If Mangal happens to be in Agaman Avastha, the native will be virtuous, endowed with precious gems, will adore a sharp sword, will walk with the (majestic) gait of an elephant (imparting surprise in the onlooker), will destroy his enemies, and will remove the miseries of his people. If Mangal is placed in Sabh Avastha and happens to be in exaltation the native will be skilful in conducting wars, will hold the flag of righteousness aloft, and will be wealthy; if Mangal happens to be in Sabh Avastha in Putr, or Dharm Bhava, the native will be bereft of learning; if Mangal is in Sabh Avastha in Vyaya Bhava childlessness and no wife and no friends will result; and if Mangal is in other bhavas (i.e. other than Putr, Dharm, and Vyaya Bhava), in Sabh Avastha, the native will be a scholar in a king's court (i.e. be a poet laureate), be very wealthy, honourable, and charitable. If Mangal is in Agam Avastha, the native will be devoid of virtues and good deeds, will be distressed by diseases, will acquire diseases of the root of the ears ('Karan Mularogam' & 'Padamulam Urumulam', etc.), and severe gout pains; he will be timid and will befriend evil lot. If Mangal is with strength, while in Bhojan Avastha, the native will eat sweet-food; if Mangal is devoid of strength, while in Bhojan Avastha, the native will indulge in base acts and be dishonourable. If Mangal is in Nritya Lips Avastha, the native will earn wealth through the king and will be endowed with fullness of gold, diamonds, and corals in his house. If Mangal is in Kautuk Avastha the native will be curious in disposition and will be endowed with friends and sons; if Mangal is in Kautuk Avastha and simultaneously exalted, the native will be honoured by the king and the virtuous and he will be virtuous himself. If Mangal is in Nidr Avastha, the native will be short-tempered, devoid of intelligence and wealth; he will be wicked, fallen from virtuous path, and troubled by diseases. Should Mangal be in Upavesan Avastha in Lagn, the native will be extremely sinful, and he will incur several diseases; he will be indigent and not peaceful. If Upavesan Avastha occurs for Mangal in Dharm Bhava, the native will lose his whole wealth apart from his wife and progeny. Mangal in Netrapani Avastha in Lagn will give poverty and will destroy the native's wife and progeny; If Mangal is in Netrapani Avastha in other bhavas (i.e. in bhavas other than Tanu Bhava), this confers on the native all kinds of wealth and happiness from wife and children. The Dhan Bhava position or Yuvati Bhava position of Mangal in Netrapani Avastha will cause fear from lions and snakes, apart from giving earnings from lands. Furthermore, the native's wife will predecease him. Should Mangal be in Prakash Avastha in Putr or in Yuvati Bhava, the native will lose his wife and all children. If Mangal is placed in Putr Bhava in Prakash Avastha, and is yuti with Shani, the native will kill cows. Should Mangal be in Gaman Avastha in Lagn, the native will be active in his assignments, will incur diseases of the joins, burning pains in the eyes, and will obtain dental afflictions and the like; he will have fear from dogs and will adore the guise of a female. In other bhavas, other than Tanu Bhava, Mangal in Gaman Avastha will bring royal favours, leadership ,and luxuries of life. Mangal in Agaman Avastha will cause piles and diseases of the rectum. If Mangal is in Bhojan Avastha or in Sayan Avastha in Putr Bhava, or in Randhr Bhava, there will be untimely death for the native. In other bhavas, other than Putr and Randhr Bhava, Bhojan Avastha of Mangal will confer wealth. Should Mangal be in Nritya Lips Avastha and happens to be in Lagn, Dhan, Yuvati, or Karm Bhava, the native will receive all kinds of happiness; there will be miseries in abundance if Mangal is in Nritya Lips Avastha and placed in Randhr or Dharm Bhava, apart from incurring untimely death. In other bhavas (i.e. Sahaj, Bandhu, Putr, Ari, Labh, or Vyaya Bhava), Nritya Lips Avastha of Mangal will make the native akin to Kuber. Mangal in Yuvati or in Dharm Bhava in Kautuk Avastha will give several diseases and death of the first child and wife. In other bhavas (i.e. not in Yuvati or Dharm Bhava), Kautuk Avastha will confer scholarship, various kinds of wealth, two wives, and more female children. In Nidr Avastha, Mangal in Lagn, Dhan, Sahaj, Dharm, Karm, or Labh Bhava will give scholarship, foolishness, and poverty. Putr or Yuvati Bhava placement of Mangal in Nidr Avastha will give many miseries and many male children. Should Rahu join Mangal in Nidr Avastha in any bhava the native will have many wives, be miserable, and will suffer from some diseases on the surface of the feet.

76-86. Effects of Buddh's Avasthas at Birth: Should Buddh in Sayan Avastha be in Lagn, the native will be lame and will have reddish eyes (like the black bee); if Buddh is in Sayan Avastha in other bhavas (i.e. other than Tanu Bhava), the native will be addicted to licentious (i.e. disregarding certain rules) pleasures and be wicked. If Buddh is in Upavesan Avastha in Lagn, the native will possess (the seven principle) virtues; if Buddh in Upavesan Avastha is in Lagn, receiving a drishti from a malefic, or drishtis from malefics, or is yuti with malefics, penury will result; and if Buddh in Upavesan Avastha is in Lagn receiving a drishti from a benefic, or drishtis from benefics, or is yuti with benefics, financial happiness will follow. If Buddh is in Netrapani Avastha, the native will be devoid of learning, wisdom, well wishers, and satisfaction but he will be honourable; if Buddh is in Putr Bhava in Netrapani Avastha, the subject will be bereft of happiness from wife and sons; he will be endowed with (more) female children and will gain abundant finance through royal patronage. If Buddh is in Prakash Avastha, the native will be charitable, merciful, and meritorious; he will cross the boundaries of ocean in respect of many branches of learning; he will be endowed with the great faculty of discrimination, and he will destroy evil people. If Buddh is in Gaman Avastha the native will visit the courts of kings on many occasions and Goddess Lakshmi (denoting wealth) will dwell in his abode. If Buddh is in Agaman Avastha, the same effects due to his being in Gaman Avastha will fructify, i.e. the native will visit the courts of kings on many occasions and Goddess Lakshmi (denoting wealth) will dwell in his abode. If Buddh is in Sabh Avastha and happens to be in exaltation, the native will be affluent and meritorious at all times; he will be equal to Kuber (the lord of wealth); or he will be a king or a minister; he will be devoted to Lord Vishnu and Lord Shiva; he will be virtuous and will attain full enlightenment. Should Buddh be in Agam Avastha the native will serve base men and gain wealth thereby; and he will have two sons and one fame bringing daughter. If Buddh is in Bhojan Avastha, the native will face financial losses through litigations, will physically lose on account of fear from the king (i.e. he will become thin due to royal wrath); he will be fickle-minded and will be bereft of physical and conjugal felicity. If Buddh is in Nritya Lips Avastha, the native will be endowed with honour, conveyances, corals (i.e. gems, etc.), sons, friends, prowess, and recognition in assembly due to his scholarship; if Buddh in Nritya Lips Avastha is in a malefic's rashi the native will be addicted to prostitutes and will long for licentious pleasures. If Buddh is in Kautuk Avastha in Lagn, the native will be skilful in music; if Buddh is in Yuvati or Randhr Bhava with Kautuk Avastha the native will be addicted to courtezans; and if Buddh in Kautuk Avastha is placed in Dharm Bhava, the native will be meritorious and attain heavens after death. If Buddh is in Nidr Avastha, the native will not enjoy comfortable sleep; he will be afflicted by neck or neck joint 'Samadhi' diseases; he will be devoid of co-born, afflicted by miseries galore (i.e. in abundance), will enter into litigations with his own men, and he will lose wealth and honour.

87-98. Effects of Guru's Avasthas at Birth: If Guru is in Sayan Avastha, the native will be strong but will speak in whispers; he will be very tawny in complexion, will have prominent cheeks, and will have fear from enemies. If Guru is in Upavesan Avastha, the native will be garrulous and very proud; he will be troubled by the king and enemies; and he will have ulcers on the feet shanks, face, and hands. If Guru is in Netrapani Avastha the native will be afflicted by diseases; he will be devoid of wealth, be fond of music and dances, libidinous, tawny in complexion and he will be attached to people of other castes. If Guru is in Prakash Avastha, the native will enjoy virtues; he will be happy, splendorous, and will visit holy places devoted to Lord Krishna; if Guru in Prakash Avastha is exalted, the native will attain greatness among men and will be equal to Kuber (the lord of wealth). If Guru is in Gaman Avastha the native will be adventurous; he will be happy on account of friends; he will be scholarly and endowed with Vedic learning and with various kinds of wealth. If Guru is in Agaman Avastha, serving force, excellent women, and the goddess of wealth will never leave the native's abode. If Guru is in Sabh Avastha, the native will attain comparability with Guru (the God of speech) in the matter of speech; he will be endowed with superior corals, rubies, and wealth; he will be rich with elephants, horses, and chariots; and he will be supremely learned. If Guru is in Agam Avastha, the native will be endowed with various conveyances, honours, retinue (i.e. many persons will take good care off him), children, wife, friends, and learning; he will be equal to a king, extremely noble, fond of literature, and he will take to the path of the virtuous. If Guru is in Bhojan Avastha the native will always beget excellent food and horses, elephants and chariots, while Lakshmi, the Goddess of Wealth, will never leave his house. If Guru is in Nritya Lips Avastha, the native will receive royal honours; he will be wealthy, endowed with knowledge of moral law 'Dharma' and Tantra (a branch of learning dealing with magical formulas to attain super human powers); he will be supreme among the learned and be a great grammarian. If Guru is in Kautuk Avastha, the native will be curious in disposition; he will be very rich; he will shine like Surya in his circles; he will be exceedingly kind, happy, honoured by the kings, endowed with sons, wealth, and just disposition. He will be very strong and he will be a scholar in the king's court. If Guru is in Nidr Avastha, the native will be foolish in all his undertakings; he will suffer irredeemable penury and will be devoid of righteous acts.

99-110. Effects of Shukr's Avasthas at Birth: If Shukr is in Sayan Avastha, the native although strong, will incur dental disease; he will be very short-tempered; he will be bereft of wealth, will seek union with courtezans, and be licentious. If Shukr is in Upavesan Avastha, the native will be endowed with a multitude of nine gems ('Navamin Vraja') and golden ornaments; he will be ever happy, will destroy enemies, and will be honoured by the king. He will have highly increased honours. If Shukr is in Netrapani Avastha in Lagn, Yuvati, or Karm Bhava, there will be loss of wealth on account of afflictions of the sense of sight (i.e. heavy medical expenses due to severe eye diseases). and if Netrapani Avastha occurs when Shukr is in other bhavas (i.e. bhavas other than Tanu, Yuvati, and Karm Bhava), the native will own large houses. Should Shukr be in Prakash Avastha in its own rashi, in its exaltation rashi, or in a friendly rashi, the native will sport like a lofty elephant; he will be equal to a king; and he will be skilful in poetry and music. If Shukr is in Gaman Avastha, the native will not have a long living mother, will lament over separation from his own people and will have fear from enemies. If Shukr is in Agaman Avastha, the native will command abundant wealth; he will undertake to visit superior shrines; he will be ever enthusiastic; and he will contract diseases of the hand and foot. If Shukr is in Sabh Avastha the native will earn eminence in the king's court; he will be very virtuous; he will destroy enemies; he will be equal to Kuber in wealth; he will be charitable, will ride on horses, and will be excellent among men. If Shukr is in Agam Avastha, there will be no advent of wealth, but there will be troubles from enemies, separation from children and relatives, diseases, and lack of pleasures from the wife. Should Shukr be in Bhojan Avastha, the native will be distressed due to hunger, diseases, and many kinds of fear from enemies; and if Shukr is in Kanya in Bhojan Avastha, the native will be very rich and will be honoured by scholars. If Shukr is in Nritya lips Avastha, the native will be skilful in literature and intelligent; he will play musical instruments like lute, tabla, etc.; he will be meritorious and very affluent. If Shukr is in Kautuk Avastha, the native will be equal to Lord Indra. He will attain greatness in the assembly; he will be learned and will have Lakshmi always dwelling in his abode. If Shukr is in Nidr Avastha, the native will be interested in serving others; he will blame others; he will be heroic, garrulous, and he will be wandering all over the earth.

111-122. Effects of Shani's Avasthas at Birth: If Shani is in Sayan Avastha, the native will be troubled by hunger and thirst; he will incur diseases in boyhood; and later on he will become wealthy. If Shani is in Upavesan Avastha the native will be troubled greatly by enemies; he will contract dangers; he will have ulcers all over the body; he will be self-respected; and he will be punished by the king. If Shani is in Netrapani Avastha, the native will be endowed with a charming female, wealth, royal favour, and friends; he will have knowledge of many arts; and he will be an eloquent speaker. If Shani is in Prakash Avastha, the native will be very virtuous, very wealthy, intelligent, sportive, splendorous, merciful, and devoted to Lord Shiva. If Shani is in Gaman Avastha the native will be very rich, and endowed with sons; he will grab enemy's lands; and he will be a scholar at royal court. If Shani is in Agaman Avastha, the native will be akin to a donkey (i.e. foolish) and bereft of happiness from wife and children; he will always roam pitiably without anybody's patronage. If Shani is in Sabh Avastha the native will have surprising (i.e. great) possessions of abundant precious stones and gold; he will be endowed with great judicial (or political) knowledge; and he will be extremely brilliant. If Shani is in Agam Avastha, the native will incur diseases, and will not be skilful in earning royal patronage. If Shani is in Bhojan Avastha, the native will enjoy tastes of food; he will be weak-sighted and he will be fickle-minded due to mental delusion. If Shani is in Nritya Lips Avastha, the native will be righteous, extremely opulent, honoured by the king, and brave; he will be heroic in the field of war. If Shani is in Kautuk Avastha the native will be endowed with lands and wealth; he will be happy, endowed with pleasures through charming females; and he will be learned in poetry, arts, etc.. If Shani is in Nidr Avastha the native will be rich, endowed with charming virtues, and valorous; he will destroy even fierce enemies and he will be skilful in seeking pleasures through harlots.

123-134. Effects of Rahu's Avasthas at Birth: If Rahu is in Sayan Avastha, the native will experience miseries in abundance; but if Rahu in Sayan Avastha is placed in Vrishabh, Mithun, Kanya, or Mesh the native will be endowed with wealth and grains. If Rahu is in Upavesan Avastha the native will be distressed due to ulcers; he will be endowed with royal association; he will be highly honourable and ever devoid of financial happiness. If Rahu is in Netrapani Avastha, the native will be troubled by eye diseases, will have fear from wicked people, snakes, and thieves and will incur financial decline. If Rahu is in Prakash Avastha, the native will acquire a high position, will perform auspicious acts, and will obtain elevation of his financial state; he will be highly virtuous; he will be a chief in the king's court, charming like freshly formed clouds (that will cause soon rain), and he will be very prosperous in foreign places. If Rahu is in Gaman Avastha the native will be endowed with numerous children; he will be scholarly, wealthy, charitable, and honoured by the king. If Rahu is in Agaman Avastha, the native will be very irritable, bereft of intelligence and wealth, crooked, miserly, and libidinous. If Rahu is in Sabh Avastha the native will be scholarly, miserly, and endowed with many virtues, wealth, and happiness. If Rahu is in Agam Avastha, the native will be always mentally distressed, will have fear from enemies and litigations with enemies; he will be bereft of his own men; he will face financial destruction; and he will be crafty and emaciated. If Rahu is in Bhojan Avastha, the native will be distressed without food, and dull-witted; he will not be bold in his acts, and he will be bereft of conjugal and progenic happiness. If Rahu is in Nritya Lips Avastha, the native will contract a serious disease which seems difficult to subdue, will have afflicted eyes, and will have fear from enemies. He will decline financially and righteously. If Rahu is in Kautuk Avastha, the native will be devoid of a position (or a place); he will be interested in others' females, and he will steal others' wealth. If Rahu is in Nidr Avastha the native will be a repository of virtues; he will be endowed with wife and children; he will be bold, proud, and very affluent. 

135-146. Effects of Ketu's Avasthas at Birth: If Ketu is in Sayan Avastha in Mesh, Vrishabh, Mithun, or Kanya, there will be plenty of wealth; while if Ketu is in Sayan Avastha in other rashis (i.e. other rashis than Mesh, Vrishabh, Mithun, or Kanya), increased diseases will follow. If Ketu is in Upavesan Avastha the native will suffer from ulcers and will have fear from enemies, windy diseases, snakes, and thieves. Should Ketu be in Netrapani Avastha, the native will contract eye diseases, and will have fear from wicked people, snakes, enemies, and people of royal family. If Ketu is in Prakash Avastha, the native will be wealthy and righteous; he will live in foreign places; he will be enthusiastic and genuine; and he will serve the king. If Ketu is in Gaman Avastha, the native will be endowed with many sons, and abundant wealth; he will be scholarly, virtuous, charitable, and he will be excellent among men. If Ketu is in Agaman Avastha, the native will incur many diseases, will face loss of wealth, will hurt (others) with his teeth ('Danta Ghatin'); he will be a tale bearer and will blame others. If Ketu is in Sabh Avastha the native will be garrulous, very proud, miserly, licentious, and skilful in evil branches of learning. If Ketu is in Agam Avastha, the native will be a notorious sinner; he will enter into litigations with his relatives; he will be wicked, and he will be troubled by diseases and enemies. If Ketu is in Bhojan Avastha, the native will always be distressed with hunger, penury and diseases, and he will roam all over the earth. If Ketu is in Nritya Lips Avastha, the native will be distressed due to diseases, will have a floral mark on the eye (i.e. white of the pupil); he will be impertinent and wicked; and he will plan evils. If Ketu is in Kautuk Avastha, the native will seek union with dancing females (i.e. prostitutes); he will suffer positional displacement; he will take to evil paths and will roam all over. If Ketu is in Nidr Avastha the native will be endowed with wealth and corns; he will be virtuous and will spend his time sportively.

147. General Effects (up to sloka 155): O Brahmin, if a benefic grah is in Sayan Avastha, there will be benefic effects at all times according to the learned.

148. If a malefic is in Bhojan Avastha, everything (related to the bhava concerned) will be destroyed and there is no need of a second thought.

149. Should a malefic in Yuvati Bhava be in Nidr Avastha auspicious effects will follow, provided that there is no drishti from another malefic.

150. Declare without a second thought auspicious effects following the location of a malefic in Putr Bhava, but only with Nidr Avastha or in Sayan Avastha.

151. Untimely death due to royal wrath will come to pass if there is a malefic in Randhr Bhava in Nidr Avastha or in Sayan Avastha.

152. If in the case of a malefic in Randhr Bhava in Nidr Avastha or Sayan Avastha, there happen to be a benefic drishti or the yuti of a benefic. (untimely) death will be in the river Ganges, i.e. Gangetic belt, shrines, etc.

153. If there is a malefic in Karm Bhava in Sayan Avastha or Bhojan Avastha, the native will face many miseries on account of his own deeds.

154. 0 excellent of the Brahmins, doubtlessly a Raj Yog will come to pass, if Chandr is in Karm Bhava in Kautuk Avastha or Prakash Avastha.

155. Thus, the good and bad effects should be guessed assessing the strength and weakness of the grahas concerning all the bhavas. 


